United Nations General Assembly A/HRC/53/11 Distr.: General 23 March 2023 Original: English Human Rights Council Fifty-third session 19 June–14 July 2023 Agenda item 6 Universal periodic review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Republic of Korea * The annex is being circulated without formal editing, in the language of submission only. GE.23-03422 (E) 230323 230323 A/HRC/53/11 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its forty-second session from 23 January to 3 February 2023. The review of the Republic of Korea was held at the 8th meeting, on 26 January 2023. The delegation of the Republic of Korea was headed by the Vice-Minister of Justice, Noh Kong Lee. At its 15th meeting, held on 1 February 2023, the Working Group adopted the report on the Republic of Korea. On 11 January 2023, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of 2. rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the Republic of Korea: Côte d’Ivoire, France and United Arab Emirates. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of the Republic of Korea: (a) paragraph 15 (a);1 A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b);2 (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c).3 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Canada, Germany, Liechtenstein, Panama, Portugal, on behalf of Group of Friends on national mechanisms for implementation, reporting and follow-up, Slovenia, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Uruguay was transmitted to the Republic of Korea through the troika. The questions are available on the website of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation stated that, in May 2022, a new Government had assumed office, and it sought to participate in United Nations human rights mechanisms to fulfil its role as a “global pivotal State”. In preparing for the fourth cycle of the universal periodic review, the Government had 6. consulted ministries and agencies, the National Human Rights Commission and civil society and had attended the pre-session briefing on the universal periodic review, held in Geneva. Responding to third cycle recommendations, the Government had acceded to the 7. Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. It had ratified three fundamental conventions of the International Labour Organization (ILO), namely, the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), the Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, 1948 (No. 87), and the Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949 (No. 98), and had withdrawn its reservation to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The Government was considering accession to other treaties and would ensure the implementation of the treaties it had already signed. 1 A/HRC/WG.6/42/KOR/1. 2 A/HRC/WG.6/42/KOR/2. 3 A/HRC/WG.6/42/KOR/3. 2 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 The Republic of Korea had cooperated in country visits by several special procedure 8. mandate holders and had served as a member of the Human Rights Council in the periods 2016–2018 and 2020–2022. 9. In 2018, the Government had adopted the third national action plan for the promotion and protection of human rights, with a new chapter on business and human rights. In preparing the fourth plan, it planned to include policies regarding the digital transition. 10. Government measures ensured freedom of assembly, including through use of the “Korean model of police dialogue system” on police facilitation of peaceful assemblies, the provision of human rights training for police officers and the conduct of human rights impact assessments for related police activities. The Government was enforcing 11. encompassing a response plan for combating human trafficking. the Human Trafficking Prevention Act, 12. An alternative service system for conscientious objectors had been established. Pursuant to new legislation, conscientious objectors performed their duties in correctional facilities. To address overcrowding in correctional facilities, efforts had continued to secure 13. additional space through the renovation of correctional institutions. 14. Regarding social security, the Government had expanded the eligibility of recipients, as well as the child allowance, the basic pension for the elderly and the disability pension. The medical allowance programme and the personal contribution cap system had alleviated medical expenses for low-income groups. 15. In the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the Government had made efforts to protect the human rights of vulnerable groups. Addressing the female employment crisis, it had created approximately 780,000 new jobs and had strengthened support and childcare services. In 2020, online learning had been implemented. 16. With respect to labour rights, provisions in the Labor Standards Act protected workers from harassment and obliged employers to investigate cases. The scope of employment and industrial accident insurance had also been expanded. 17. The Republic of Korea enjoyed a 99 per cent high school enrolment rate. The Government extended free education to high school and provided education allowances to children from low-income families. 18. The Government had established the gender equality basic plan in 2018 and had introduced the Framework Act on the Prevention of Violence against Women and a corresponding basic plan. The Digital Sex Crime Victim Support Centre had been created, and laws had been amended to increase penalties and offences. New laws had established the legal grounds for the punishment and prevention of the crime of stalking and support for victims. To address discrimination in employment, labour inspectors supervised the gender equality support system. 19. Under the amended Child Welfare Act, the National Center for the Rights of the Child and the basic children policy plan had been established. Public officials in charge of combating child abuse had been installed in local governments, and the number of protection agencies and shelters had been increased. The right to take disciplinary action in the Civil Act had been removed. The Government had amended laws to exclude the statute of limitations for sexual violence crimes against children. Through the youth policy implementation plan, the Government sought to prevent the marginalization of youth. 20. To eradicate sexual violence in the military, the Government had introduced provisions in rules to separate perpetrators and victims, had established a dedicated organization under the Ministry of National Defence and had increased the number of counsellors specialized in complaints of sexual offences. 21. An officer to protect human rights in the military had been established within the National Human Rights Commission. GE.23-03422 3 A/HRC/53/11 Regarding persons with disabilities, the Act on Guarantee of Right to Health and 22. Access to Medical Services for Persons with Disabilities supported health management projects, while measures to strengthen lifetime care for persons with developmental disabilities provided for 24-hour care. The Government had increased the amount of the disability pension and had ensured individualized welfare services. 23. For older persons, there was strengthened care for dementia patients, shelters for elderly victims of abuse, personalized care services and expanded employment opportunities. 24. On the social integration of foreigners, the basic plan for immigration policy had been advanced, and 20 May had been designated as Together Day. The Government supervised businesses to prevent violations of migrant workers’ rights. Under an improved employment permit system, foreign workers were allowed unlimited workplace changes if they were not responsible for their employment termination. The Foreigner Detention Regulation designated human rights protection officers. The Government had added refugee status determination officers and had issued guidelines on appeal procedures. The Government had guaranteed the right of all children to receive free compulsory education, regardless of residence status. 25. The Government had incorporated a human rights-based approach into development cooperation. The Korea International Cooperation Agency had launched the human rights- based development cooperation implementation plan, in 2020, to promote the rights of vulnerable groups and had integrated human rights into project management. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 26. During the interactive dialogue, 95 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. The Islamic Republic of Iran expressed concern about inequalities, discrimination 27. against women and girls and the rise of hate speech against migrants and refugees. 28. Iraq commended the legislative and institutional framework to promote human rights, including to guarantee respect for the right to housing, strengthen social protection and combat human trafficking. Ireland welcomed the decriminalization of abortion and the expanded definitions of 29. domestic violence crimes, but noted a lack of progress made on comprehensive anti- discrimination legislation, which was recommended previously. 30. Israel praised progress made on non-regular workers, the rights of persons with disabilities and combating violence against women, but expressed concern about sexual violence in the armed forces. 31. Italy lauded the efforts made to eliminate discrimination against women, promote gender equality and enhance female representation in the public sector, notably the gender equality basic plan. Japan expressed appreciation for efforts to increase female representation in both the 32. public and private sectors and to address social inequality, among other things. Jordan commended the efforts made in preparing the national report, reflecting human 33. rights achievements, and the laws addressing human trafficking and domestic violence. 34. Kazakhstan welcomed advances in social policy, support for persons in vulnerable situations, the improvement of human rights in the military and human rights education in schools. 35. Kuwait expressed appreciation for the efforts made in preparing the national report and in implementing recommendations from the previous universal periodic review cycle. 36. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic commended the Republic of Korea for its contribution to the international development cooperation framework and the progress made in protecting the rights of vulnerable groups. 4 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 Lebanon hailed the implementation of the national action plan, 2018–2022, the 37. preparations for the new plan and the Act on the prevention of human trafficking and the protection of victims. Libya praised the Republic of Korea for its positive cooperation with the universal 38. periodic review process and the efforts made to promote and protect human rights. Lithuania commended the Republic of Korea for its continued efforts to place human 39. rights at the forefront of its national agenda. Luxembourg welcomed the efforts made to implement recommendations from the 40. previous universal periodic review cycle and the passage of the law to prevent human trafficking. 41. Malawi expressed appreciation for the progress made in the promotion of human rights since the previous review and noted the passage of legislation to prevent human trafficking. 42. Malaysia highlighted the strengthened cohesiveness of policies to protect human rights and encouraged continued measures towards social equality, affordable education and basic medical services. 43. Maldives commended the consultative approach to the national report and the establishment of the National Centre for the Rights of the Child for policies on children. The Marshall Islands welcomed efforts to protect the rights of women and children 44. and the move towards the formal abolition of the death penalty. 45. Mauritius praised the financial support provided to the Voluntary Technical Assistance Trust Fund to Support the Participation of Least Developed Countries and Small Island Developing States in the Work of the Human Rights Council and the subsidy for children from low-income families to facilitate access to schooling. 46. Mexico lauded the Human Trafficking Prevention Act and ratification of the ILO Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, 1948 (No. 87), and Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949 (No. 98). 47. Mongolia hailed the implementation of the national action plan on human rights, strengthened labour rights, improved work environments and the increase in female representation at all levels. 48. Montenegro welcomed the withdrawal of the reservation to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and called for commuting all death sentences to life imprisonment. 49. Namibia applauded the country’s commitment to sustainable development, its human rights-based approach to international development cooperation and the introduction of human rights education in schools. 50. Nepal welcomed the Human Trafficking Prevention Act, the protection of migrant workers’ rights and the poverty reduction efforts for older persons. The Kingdom of the Netherlands valued efforts to uphold human rights instruments, 51. but expressed concern about discrimination and violence, including online and against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex and other persons. 52. New Zealand commended the decriminalization of abortion, as an important step in recognizing the rights of women, and the legislative work to protect those with disabilities. 53. Norway welcomed the improved enforcement of the Single-Parent Family Support Act and the implementation of the Framework Act on the Prevention of Violence against Women. 54. Pakistan commended the country’s cooperation with human rights mechanisms and the legislative and policy measures adopted on human trafficking, human rights and domestic violence. GE.23-03422 5 A/HRC/53/11 55. Panama made recommendations. 56. Paraguay welcomed the bill on the birth registration of foreign children and the preventative approach towards racial discrimination and xenophobia included in migration policies. Peru noted the implementation of the third national action plan for the promotion and 57. protection of human rights for the period 2018–2022. 58. The Philippines lauded the third strategic plan for international development cooperation, the commitment to ILO conventions and the efforts to combat discrimination against foreigners and migrants. 59. Poland commended the introduction of alternative service and of human rights education in schools and encouraged efforts towards the identification and protection of human trafficking victims. Portugal praised the withdrawal of the reservation to article 25 (e) of the Convention 60. on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 61. Qatar commended the Republic of Korea for adopting several policy and legislative measures to implement the recommendations it had accepted during the previous universal periodic review cycle. The Russian Federation expressed regret that recommendations made during the third 62. universal periodic review cycle had not been sufficiently implemented. 63. Senegal hailed the sustained efforts to implement recommendations received during the third universal periodic review cycle and the national action plans to address various human rights challenges. 64. Serbia welcomed efforts to improve social equality by expanding the social safety net for vulnerable groups and the frameworks to address various forms of violence against women. 65. Singapore welcomed the efforts to improve accessibility to health care and public transport for persons with disabilities and the welfare of older persons through expanded services. Slovakia encouraged further accessions to treaties, was pleased that capital 66. punishment had not been implemented recently and regretted that alternative military service conditions were not proportionate. Slovenia expressed appreciation regarding 67. to conscientious objection to military service and stressed the importance of strategies to realize the rights of older persons. the recognition of the right 68. Spain hailed the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the approval of the Human Trafficking Prevention Act. Sri Lanka welcomed action taken to comply with the Convention on the Rights of 69. Persons with Disabilities and the interaction with special procedure mandate holders. The Sudan commended the national action plan for human rights, the legislation on 70. the prevention of trafficking and on violence against women and the national inclusive children policy. Switzerland welcomed the de facto moratorium on the death penalty and the support 71. of the Republic of Korea for related resolutions. It encouraged continued efforts to promote gender equality. 72. The Syrian Arab Republic noted with concern the continuation of violence against women and the impact of the spread of information technologies on rising levels of violence against women. 6 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 Thailand acknowledged the efforts regarding business and human rights, the progress 73. made on the labour rights of foreign workers, the improved employment permit system and legislation to combat human trafficking. 74. Timor-Leste noted that the Republic of Korea was a de facto abolitionist State and welcomed the decriminalization of conscientious objection and the improved employment system. 75. Togo welcomed measures aimed at eliminating discrimination and hate speech against migrants, refugees and foreigners, and the establishment of the universal birth registration system. 76. Türkiye noted appreciatively the efforts to implement recommendations from the previous cycle and towards the adoption of laws on equality and non-discrimination that would strengthen the legal framework. 77. Turkmenistan noted the implementation of the national action plan for human rights, 2018–2022, and assessed positively the efforts to apply a human rights-based approach to development cooperation. 78. Ukraine commended the country’s commitment to promote and protect human rights and efforts to fulfil obligations under international treaties and cooperate with human rights mechanisms. The United Kingdom welcomed the steps taken to tackle human trafficking, 79. encouraged prioritizing equality and non-discrimination and urged it to place a moratorium on executions. The United States applauded the Republic of Korea for promoting human rights 80. globally, but was concerned by the low rates of approval of refugee status. 81. Uruguay welcomed efforts made by the country, including the promulgation of the Human Trafficking Prevention Act. 82. Uzbekistan praised legislation against human trafficking and assessed positively the fact that the application of death sentences had not been carried out since 1998. 83. Vanuatu welcomed the delegation of the Republic of Korea and thanked it for its presentation. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela expressed concern about the suspicion of 84. migrants and refugees, the rise of hate speech and allegations of torture and ill-treatment. 85. Viet Nam applauded the efforts of the Republic of Korea in increasing female representation, respecting cultural diversity and supporting the marriage of immigrants and multicultural families. Zambia commended the Government’s efforts to fulfil its obligations under the core 86. international human rights treaties and to comply with the human rights mechanisms. 87. Algeria lauded international cooperation projects by the Korea International Cooperation Agency under its strategy for 2021–2025 and the steps taken against discrimination, racial discrimination and xenophobia. 88. Argentina commended the Republic of Korea on the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. 89. Australia welcomed the country’s commitment in its Indo-Pacific strategy to promote human rights and its support for General Assembly resolution 77/222 on a moratorium on the use of the death penalty. 90. Azerbaijan noted positively the efforts to comply with human rights mechanism recommendations and highlighted the strategic plan for international development cooperation stipulating human rights considerations. 91. Bangladesh appreciated the legislation addressing human trafficking and violence against women and the efforts to address social inequality through expansion of the social safety net and housing. GE.23-03422 7 A/HRC/53/11 Belarus extended a welcome to the delegation of the Republic of Korea and thanked 92. it for submitting its report. 93. Belgium congratulated the Republic of Korea on the decriminalization of abortion in 2021, but noted that more progress could be achieved regarding gender inequality and anti- discrimination. 94. Bhutan lauded the legislative measures against human trafficking and domestic violence, the measures to promote the right to housing and the efforts on the rights of the child. 95. Brazil encouraged the continued implementation of human rights education programmes in schools, investment in capacity-building for teachers and the implementation of the ILO Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, 1948 (No. 87), and Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949 (No. 98). 96. Brunei Darussalam valued the support provided to persons with disabilities through various schemes and the improvements in promoting gender equality at work, in particular equal pay for work of equal value. 97. Bulgaria encouraged continuing the good practice of human rights education in schools and capacity-building for teachers and highlighted the activities of the National Human Rights Commission. Canada took note of the commitment of the Republic of Korea to advancing human 98. rights internationally as part of its “global pivotal State” foreign policy. Chile commended the implementation of the first basic plan for policies for the 99. prevention of violence against women. 100. China noted progress achieved, but was concerned about discrimination against immigrants and ethnic minorities, sexual harassment against women and the rights of vulnerable groups being ineffectively protected. 101. Colombia welcomed the law against human trafficking, the plan addressing violence against women and the plan on improved representation of women in the public sector. 102. Costa Rica thanked the Republic of Korea for the presentation of its national report and made recommendations. 103. Côte d’Ivoire congratulated the Republic of Korea on the measures taken to improve the human rights situation since the previous review and encouraged continued efforts. 104. Croatia welcomed the Framework Act to prevent violence against women and the decision to decriminalize conscientious objection, but expressed concern about the rights of people performing alternative service. 105. Cyprus hailed the strengthened legislation to combat discrimination against persons with disabilities and the implementation of the basic plan for the protection and promotion of cultural diversity. 106. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea expressed deep concern about systematic and widespread human rights violations in the Republic of Korea. 107. Denmark expressed concern that lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons faced legal, social and economic barriers and highlighted that the Convention against Torture Initiative stood ready to assist. 108. Egypt praised efforts to protect human rights, including the withdrawal of the reservation to article 25 (e) of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 109. El Salvador welcomed the legislation to prevent human trafficking and the withdrawal of the reservation to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 110. Estonia noted appreciatively the implementation of the third national action plan for human rights, the inclusion of human rights education in schools and the progress made towards gender equality. 8 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 111. Finland welcomed the progress made by the Republic of Korea since the previous universal periodic review cycle. 112. France welcomed the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. 113. The Gambia commended the amendment to the Child Welfare Act of 2020, including making public officials responsible for abuse in local governments and conducting on-site investigations. 114. Georgia positively evaluated the measures to address the social inequality of vulnerable groups, progressively realize the right to housing and promote women’s rights and gender equality. 115. Germany asserted that the Republic of Korea was an inspiring example for its region and noted the introduction of an alternative service to military conscription. 116. Ghana lauded the inclusion of human rights education in schools, the adoption of the gender equality basic plan and the human rights measures in the military service. 117. Greece commended the withdrawal of the reservation to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the legislation to prevent human trafficking and punish domestic violence. 118. Iceland welcomed the delegation of the Republic of Korea and its national report. 119. India noted with appreciation the decriminalization of abortion, the legislation and plan to prevent violence against women and the National Centre for the Rights of the Child. 120. Indonesia acknowledged the progress made in human rights promotion and protection, including regarding military service, and women’s empowerment through the gender equality basic plan. 121. Kyrgyzstan welcomed the significant steps taken to strengthen legislative and policy mechanisms for the protection and promotion of human rights, with a focus on vulnerable groups. 122. In addressing advance questions, the delegation noted that the Government was participating in the ongoing discussions of the international community on the gradual reduction of the use of the death penalty. 123. The Government had integrated recommendations by United Nations human rights bodies into the national action plan and had evaluated the implementation status through the National Human Rights Policy Council. 124. The National Security Act was needed for the security of the Republic of Korea and was applied minimally to protect freedoms of expression and association. Defectors of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea were guaranteed the same freedom of expression as the general public and were provided with legal aid. 125. On a comprehensive anti-discrimination law, proposals for related bills were before the National Assembly. A complaint procedure had been established in the National Human Rights Commission. Policies recognizing same-sex marriage required social consensus. 126. Regarding domestic violence, the police were obliged to take emergency measures, while prosecutors could request restraining orders. Marital rape could be punished under existing law. Countering online violence against children, the Government used big data to monitor children at high risk and conducted positive parenting campaigns. 127. Identifying career interruptions as a major driver of the gender pay gap, the Government was expanding childcare leave allowances, the application of reduced working hours for childcare needs and vocational training. It had implemented the plan for enhanced gender representation in the public sector. The Government planned to integrate the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family into the Ministry of Health and Welfare to ensure more effective programme implementation. GE.23-03422 9 A/HRC/53/11 128. Education on the human rights of older persons was compulsory for those operating related facilities. Mental health welfare service centres provided community access to mental health services. 129. Those not recognized as refugees following refugee status determination were granted humanitarian stay permits, if there would be a risk of threats to their life and person upon repatriation. 130. The Government was not considering repealing article 92 (6) of the Military Criminal Act. 131. The Act on the Promotion of Newspapers and the Broadcasting Act guaranteed freedom of the press. The only exceptions to the right to freedom of assembly were instances posing a direct danger to public safety. 132. Responding to recommendations made, the Government stated that it would continue to implement the North Korean Human Rights Act to contribute to the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. 133. On the issue of “comfort women”, the Government maintained its agreement with Japan of 2015 on comfort women victims and would continue to make efforts to restore honour and dignity and to heal the psychological wounds of the victims. 134. The Trade Union and Labour Relations Adjustment Act allowed workers to freely organize or join trade unions. Workplaces were inspected annually to identify forced labour. Regarding human trafficking, the delegation highlighted enhancing awareness and using indicators for early victim identification. 135. The act on the registration of birth of foreign children was before the National Assembly. The Government was revising the Juvenile Act and the Criminal Act to lower the age of criminal responsibility to 13 years of age, while deprioritizing detention. 136. The Government had submitted a proposed amendment to the Criminal Act, stipulating requirements for abortion, and it was currently before the legislature. 137. In its concluding remarks, the delegation stated that the Government was aware that the fourth cycle of the universal periodic review was not a one-off procedure, but part of an ongoing process of continuous progress. The questions and recommendations provided would serve as valuable resources in implementing policies. The Republic of Korea strove to ensure that its human right policies would not only meet global standards, but would become best practices in the international community. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 138. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below have been examined by the Republic of Korea and enjoy the support of the Republic of Korea: 138.1 respect of Intercountry Adoption (Denmark); Ratify the Convention on Protection of Children and Cooperation in 138.2 Persons with Disabilities (Namibia); Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of 138.3 Take further steps to complete the procedure of ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Ukraine); 138.4 further defend and promote human rights (Japan); Continue to implement measures to protect vulnerable groups and 138.5 rights approach (El Salvador); Continue its international cooperation strategy based on a human 138.6 in full the Government’s third strategic plan for international development cooperation, the mid-term strategy for human rights Implement 10 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 and the human rights-based development cooperation implementation plan (Kyrgyzstan); 138.7 Conduct more multicultural understanding education for youth, public officials and educators to prevent social discrimination and prejudice against multicultural families and respect cultural diversity (Viet Nam); 138.8 discrimination and xenophobia (Algeria); Continue efforts to strengthen the fight against racism, racial 138.9 (Belarus); Increase efforts to combat hate speech and incitement to racial hatred 138.10 Take effective legislative and administrative measures to combat racial discrimination and hate speech (China); 138.11 Combat hate speech against foreigners and all forms of racial discrimination (Egypt); 138.12 Reduce overcrowding in correctional facilities (Zambia); 138.13 Work to reduce overcrowding in prisons in accordance with international standards for the treatment of prisoners (Libya); 138.14 exploitation (Lebanon); Pursue efforts aimed at fighting human trafficking and sexual 138.15 Continue its efforts to protect employees from abuses at workplaces (Sudan); 138.16 Better protect the labour rights of foreign workers and combat discrimination between national and foreign workers (Viet Nam); 138.17 Continue to reinforce the national pension system and to expand social benefits for older persons (Portugal); 138.18 Continue its ongoing efforts to address social inequality and lay a foundation for an inclusive welfare State by continuing to expand social security for vulnerable groups (Turkmenistan); 138.19 Enhance measures to strengthen mechanisms guaranteeing better protection of the rights of vulnerable groups, by expanding the social safety net (Pakistan); 138.20 Continue efforts to address social inequality and expand the social safety net for vulnerable groups (Azerbaijan); 138.21 Ensure the effective implementation of the legislation on guaranteeing the right to adequate housing and prioritizing housing for persons in a disadvantaged position (Kazakhstan); 138.22 Enhance policy measures aiming at the realization of the right to adequate housing, while ensuring that guidance on the housing welfare system is accessible for all (Azerbaijan); 138.23 Continue its efforts in promoting the right to housing and an adequate standard of living (Bhutan); 138.24 Intensify its efforts to reduce poverty, especially among older persons, by guaranteeing their access to adequate social security and medical care and by preventing discrimination and abuse (Brazil); 138.25 Consider expediting the amendment of the Criminal Act to decriminalize abortion and ensuring access to safe reproductive health services for women, including safe and legal abortion (India); 138.26 disadvantaged and marginalized groups (Georgia); Proceed with measures to improve access to health care, especially for GE.23-03422 11 A/HRC/53/11 138.27 Reform the Criminal Code and other legislation to ensure universal access to safe and legal abortion (Estonia); 138.28 Adopt a law that regulates abortion in accordance with the Constitutional Court ruling of April 2019 (Spain); 138.29 Enact legislation which would provide the legal basis to enshrine the decriminalization of abortion (New Zealand); 138.30 Guarantee universal access to safe and legal abortion by swiftly reforming the Criminal Act (Iceland); 138.31 Reform the Criminal Act to ensure universal access to safe and legal abortion (Belgium); 138.32 eradicate any form of discrimination in enrolment to schools (Bangladesh); Strengthen the means to ensure free public education for all and 138.33 Conduct appropriate training for teachers and non-teaching education personnel on inclusive education (Maldives); 138.34 Implement measures to reduce disparities in access to education in rural areas, by strengthening school infrastructure and increasing teaching personnel (Mauritius); Increase the level of official development assistance to fulfil its 138.35 international commitment of 0.7 per cent of gross national income (Bangladesh); 138.36 Continue efforts to address gender-based crimes and discrimination against women, particularly in the employment sector, including by creating conducive working environments for women (Indonesia); 138.37 Continue and strengthen its national plan for the elimination of discrimination against women and the promotion of gender equality (El Salvador); 138.38 controversies and stigma attached to victims of sexual violence (Croatia); Introduce measures to increase public awareness and combat social 138.39 Continue efforts to increase women’s participation in decision-making processes and reduce the gender pay gap (Chile); 138.40 Ensure equal opportunities for women’s empowerment in increasing access to leadership positions in the public sphere and in private businesses, including in the areas of science and technology, research and innovation (Bulgaria); 138.41 Continue enhancing programmes on the economic participation of women (Brunei Darussalam); 138.42 Continue discrimination against women and for promoting gender equality (Viet Nam); implementing policies and measures for eliminating 138.43 to eliminate discrimination against women (Türkiye); Implement more effective policies and strengthen institutions in order 138.44 Maintain, even strengthen, the services of the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family, when they are handed over to the Ministry of Health and Welfare (Switzerland); 138.45 Promote gender equality by eliminating the drivers of discrimination against women and girls, such as harmful gender stereotypes, and by establishing a comprehensive inter-agency mechanism to create an enabling environment for them to access justice (Kingdom of the Netherlands); 138.46 Promote gender equality by eliminating the drivers of discrimination against women and increasing women’s participation in the public and private sectors (Malaysia); 12 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 138.47 Take measures to increase women’s representation in public sector decision-making positions and seek to lower the gender pay gap (Lithuania); 138.48 Continue efforts to eliminate the pay gap between women and men (Iraq); 138.49 domestic violence (Kazakhstan); Strengthen efforts to address gender-based violence, including 138.50 Continue with procedures and legislation aimed at eliminating all forms of discrimination against women, gender equality, protecting women from gender-based violence and supporting victims of sexual violence (Kuwait); 138.51 victims are provided with adequate assistance (Lebanon); Pursue efforts in combating gender-based violence and ensure that 138.52 (Zambia); Strengthen efforts to combat gender-based violence against women 138.53 Significantly increase efforts to combat gender-based violence against women in all its forms in order to make the necessary legislative amendments to criminalize marital rape, as well as to recognize gender identity, in accordance with personal autonomy and human dignity (Argentina); 138.54 Adopt further concrete measures to combat gender-based violence and gender inequality, including by increasing women’s participation in both the private and public sectors (Brazil); 138.55 Organize public awareness-raising campaigns to promote gender equality and counter gender-based violence against women, including women and girls with disabilities (Estonia); 138.56 Take effective measures to combat sexual violence and harassment targeting women and girls (Syrian Arab Republic); 138.57 Strengthen the implementation of national plans for preventing violence against women and promoting gender equality (Lao People’s Democratic Republic); Introduce a taskforce to tackle all sexual violence against women, 138.58 bringing in tougher penalties for perpetrators (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 138.59 Ensure that foreign women who are victims of domestic violence and sexual violence or human trafficking or other forms of violence are guaranteed access to justice (Russian Federation); 138.60 expenses (Malaysia); Support parents by reducing the burden of childbirth and childcare 138.61 Ensure compliance with international standards by preventing inappropriate conditions of detention for minors (Gambia); 138.62 Put in place clear grounds for detention in the Juvenile Act and strengthen all measures to prevent the detention of children with adults (Gambia); 138.63 Review legislation related to juvenile justice and consider further measures related to the detention of juveniles (Bhutan); 138.64 Work on a policy strategy to prevent and monitor all forms of violence and abuse against children (Estonia); 138.65 Convention on the Rights of the Child into national legislation (Cyprus); Implement necessary legislative measures incorporate to the 138.66 against children (Belarus); Strengthen State policies aimed at eliminating violence and abuse GE.23-03422 13 A/HRC/53/11 138.67 Ensure that all children within the territory of the State have access to childcare facilities, education, health care, leisure activities and State support (Zambia); 138.68 Take effective measures to implement the second basic children policy plan to ensure the rights of children and expand State responsibility for children (Turkmenistan); 138.69 Continue the priority afforded to the promotion and protection of children’s rights by expanding the State’s responsibility for children (Sri Lanka); 138.70 the case of minors, comply with international standards (Peru); Strengthen measures to ensure that prison conditions, particularly in Implement the commitment made at the twenty-fifth anniversary of 138.71 the International Conference on Population and Development to support parents, by reducing the burden of childbirth and childcare expenses, establishing a secure childcare system with no blind spots, creating conditions for the conciliation of work and family life and an inclusive family culture that respects all children and laying the foundations for a stable life for the younger generation (Panama); 138.72 Continue its efforts to address sexual violence and abuse against children (Nepal); 138.73 Continue efforts towards improving welfare and living conditions of the elderly (Lao People’s Democratic Republic); 138.74 Continue to implement measures to address the safety, well-being and participation of older persons (Singapore); 138.75 Devise a comprehensive strategy for the protection of older persons from violence and all forms of abuse, in order to effectively prevent and address elder abuse (Slovenia); 138.76 Continue efforts to improve the living conditions of older persons (Algeria); 138.77 their families (Islamic Republic of Iran); Provide more support to people with disabilities and the elderly and 138.78 Strengthen legislative measures and financial support to enhance the access of persons with disabilities to public transportation and public facilities (Israel); 138.79 Increase efforts aimed at promoting equality between members of society and vulnerable groups, such as persons with disabilities, older persons and children, and guaranteeing their rights (Kuwait); 138.80 Continue to enhance the access to, and expand the delivery of, public services for persons with disabilities (Singapore); Strengthen the legislative framework and financial support in order to 138.81 enhance the accessibility of persons with disabilities to public transportation and facilities (Türkiye); 138.82 Continue the implementation of measures aimed at social support for older persons, people with disabilities and other vulnerable groups (Belarus); 138.83 the same right to health as all (Brunei Darussalam); Prioritize efforts to ensure that persons with disabilities are afforded 138.84 Continue efforts to improve the process of the deinstitutionalization of persons with disabilities and their full social inclusion through an accessible environment and equal payment (Bulgaria); 14 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 138.85 Continue with the initiatives for the promotion and protection of the rights of persons with disabilities, including women and girls with disabilities (India); 138.86 Adopt a legislative framework that prohibits discriminatory practices on the basis of sexual orientation and/or gender identity and that prohibits discriminatory practices on the basis of gender identity (Chile); 138.87 Continue taking measures to protect the rights of migrant workers (Pakistan); 138.88 Redouble efforts to guarantee greater protection of the human rights of migrants and foreigners (Paraguay); 138.89 Amend the relevant regulation that adversely impacts migrant workers’ right to free choice of employment, particularly the limit on the number of times and reasons a migrant worker can change workplaces (Philippines); 138.90 Further enhance measures to promote and protect the rights of migrant workers and investigate cases of both labour rights and human rights violations resulting from business activities (Thailand); 138.91 Improve effectiveness in the enforcement of labour-related laws, particularly with respect to employers and recruitment agencies, as well as enhance understanding and appropriate treatment for undocumented migrant workers (Thailand); 138.92 Take additional steps for the rights of migrants, including the improvement of the human rights situation in immigration detention facilities and the establishment of appeal and remedial procedures for those with rejected refugee status (Türkiye); 138.93 Adopt all the necessary measures to apply a human rights-based migration policy, particularly with regard to the detention of migrants, especially women and children (Uruguay); 138.94 Take further measures to protect the rights of migrants and vulnerable groups (Uzbekistan); 138.95 Take the necessary measures to eradicate hate speech and adopt a strategy to combat prejudice, misinformation and stigmatization against migrants and refugees (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 138.96 Continue efforts to ensure the protection of the rights and promotion of the welfare of migrant workers (Ghana); 138.97 Consider further measures discrimination against foreign migrants and refugees (India). for addressing prejudice and 139. The following recommendations will be examined by the Republic of Korea, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the fifty-third session of the Human Rights Council: 139.1 Child on a communications procedure (France); Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the 139.2 the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Slovakia); Consider the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on 139.3 Continue to strengthen access to the voluntary termination of pregnancy and consider ratifying the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (France); 139.4 d’Ivoire); Accede to the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Côte GE.23-03422 15 A/HRC/53/11 139.5 Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Mongolia) (Montenegro); Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on 139.6 Accede to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Mexico); 139.7 Cultural Organization Convention against Discrimination (Mauritius); Consider ratifying the United Nations Educational, Scientific and in education 139.8 Abolish the death penalty and accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Australia); 139.9 Consider abolishing the death penalty in law and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (France); 139.10 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness and the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products (Panama); 139.11 Consider the ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Portugal); 139.12 Approve a legislative initiative that eliminates the death penalty and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, since, despite the moratorium, the courts continue to hand down death sentences (Spain); 139.13 Abolish the death penalty and ratify without reservation the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Iceland); 139.14 Consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Uruguay); 139.15 Accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, and take the necessary measures to ensure its implementation (Côte d’Ivoire); 139.16 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, and commute all existing death sentences (Mexico); 139.17 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Belgium) (Chile) (Estonia) (Finland) (Germany) (Lithuania) (Switzerland) (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 139.18 Accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, as well as accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Luxembourg); 139.19 Move towards the ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Chile); 139.20 Carry out national deliberation among relevant institutions and stakeholders on the possibility of ratification of the International Convention on 16 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Indonesia); 139.21 Accede to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and strengthen national policies on migrants and family reunification (Egypt); 139.22 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Colombia); 139.23 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Algeria) (Bangladesh) (Philippines) (Togo); 139.24 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Libya) (Senegal); 139.25 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Paraguay); 139.26 Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Denmark); 139.27 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Mongolia); 139.28 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Italy); 139.29 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Finland); 139.30 Intensify ongoing processes leading up to the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Ghana); 139.31 Consider ratification of major outstanding international human rights instruments (Malawi); 139.32 Adopt comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation without delay (Ireland); 139.33 Update the relevant labour legislation so that it covers all categories of workers (Poland); 139.34 Consider reviewing its legislation to address concerns on conscientious objection and alternative services and further bring it into full compliance with its human rights obligations (Timor-Leste); 139.35 Consider including all categories of workers in the labour legislation and expand the coverage of the legislation and labour standards to all sectors of the economy (Timor-Leste); 139.36 Abolish the “National Security Law” and other evil laws which are in contravention of international human rights law, as well as the provocative so- called “north Korean Human Rights Act” (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 139.37 Consider the ratification of the Act on Birth Registration of Foreign Children (Egypt); GE.23-03422 17 A/HRC/53/11 139.38 Enhance its efforts to establish a fourth national action plan for the promotion and protection of human rights, to fulfil new demands for human rights issues and international standards, which will ensure the participation of the various stakeholders (Turkmenistan); 139.39 Consider the establishment of an integrated response system and action plan to protect the rights of vulnerable persons from climate risks (Bhutan); 139.40 Establish a permanent national mechanism for implementation, reporting and follow-up (Paraguay); 139.41 Consider amending the Criminal Code to consider racist motives as an aggravating circumstance when sentencing for criminal offences (Jordan); 139.42 Take effective measures to end the compliance with unilateral coercive measures that are illegal and contrary to international law and international human rights (Islamic Republic of Iran); 139.43 Refrain from and repeal unilateral coercive measures already taken that are contrary to international law and the United Nations Charter and that prejudice the social and economic rights of various categories of the population (Belarus); 139.44 Develop the government strategy for enacting the equality act and pass the comprehensive equality act, to establish policies to eliminate discrimination and social prejudices against sexual minorities (Kingdom of the Netherlands); 139.45 Adopt legislation to prohibit all forms of discrimination and enshrine the concept of racial discrimination in legislation, as well as introduce criminal sanctions for the incitement to ethnic hatred and acts of a violent nature based on racial grounds (Russian Federation); 139.46 Consider implementing a comprehensive law against discrimination that includes, in addition to sex, religion and social condition, the prohibition of discrimination based on physical or mental disability, race, sexual orientation and gender, among other factors (Peru); 139.47 comprehensive legislative framework (Ukraine); Strengthen efforts to combat all forms of discrimination by adopting a 139.48 Review legislation and practice to ensure alternative civilian service that is genuinely civilian, accessible to all conscientious objectors without discrimination, non-punitive and non-discriminatory in nature and cost and of a duration comparable to military service with any additional duration based on reasonable and objective criteria (Costa Rica); 139.49 Continue the ongoing efforts to adopt a comprehensive anti- discrimination act that prohibits all forms of discrimination (Croatia); 139.50 Consider the adoption of further comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation within its national human rights action plan (Greece); 139.51 Continue existing efforts to develop a government strategy for the enaction of an equality act (Greece); 139.52 Consider abolishing alternatives to death penalty (Kazakhstan); the capital punishment and introducing 139.53 Take concrete steps towards the formal abolition of the death penalty (Marshall Islands); 139.54 Entrench its moratorium on executions through the formal abolition of the death penalty, including by taking legislative action to permanently remove the death penalty from Korean law (New Zealand); 139.55 Take steps towards the formal abolition of the death penalty, based on the longstanding moratorium (Norway); 18 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 139.56 Take steps towards the legal abolition of the death penalty, while commuting the existing sentences to life imprisonment (Slovakia); 139.57 Continue its review of its legislation and policy with a view to abolishing the death penalty de jure (Timor-Leste); 139.58 Continue efforts on abolishing the death penalty at the legislative level (Uzbekistan); 139.59 moratorium for 25 years (Canada); Fully abolish the death penalty, which has been under a de facto 139.60 Abolish the death penalty (Costa Rica); 139.61 lesser punishment or full pardons (Cyprus); Formally abolish the death penalty and commute death sentences to 139.62 Consider adopting a de jure moratorium on capital executions (Italy); 139.63 (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); Put an end to torture and ill-treatment practices in detention centres 139.64 Increase measures against torture and ill-treatment, including by considering accession to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the establishment of a national preventive mechanism (Uruguay); 139.65 Review the protection and prevention mechanisms on sexual violence in the military, prevent retaliation against those who reported sexual violence and ensure the rights to justice and remedies for victims (Islamic Republic of Iran); 139.66 Review the prevention and protection mechanisms on sexual violence in the military (Israel); 139.67 Continue and strengthen efforts to improve human rights in the military (El Salvador); 139.68 Take steps on alternative service to ensure the observance of the rights to freedom of thought, belief, conscience and religion (Malawi); 139.69 Review the National Security Act, in particular article 7, to make it compliant with international human rights standards and amend the inaccuracies that could restrict the right to freedom of expression (Mexico); 139.70 guarantee freedom of expression (Paraguay); Implement adequate measures to ensure freedom of the press and 139.71 Take measures to bring the provisions of the National Security Law of 1948 and the Criminal Code of the Republic of Korea in line with international human rights standards (Russian Federation); 139.72 Repeal, revise or amend the National Security Law so that it is consistent with international law and in particular guarantees the right to freedom of expression (Switzerland); 139.73 Replace criminal defamation and libel laws with civil laws and reform national security laws to protect freedom of expression (United States of America); 139.74 Guarantee that the right to freedom of association and peaceful assembly is exercised by all persons and that its limitation and the rules on the use of public force are in accordance with international law (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 139.75 Stop the suppression of all persons from freely forming trade unions and lawfully exercising their rights, the arbitrary interference in the functioning of trade unions and the disproportionate use of force on all persons enjoying the right to peaceful assembly (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); GE.23-03422 19 A/HRC/53/11 139.76 Allow conscientious objectors to serve for a length comparable to that of military service and with a variety of options to serve, taking into account the range of talent and skills that conscientious objectors can contribute to the nation (Canada); 139.77 Ensure that no conscientious objector to military service is imprisoned or deprived of their liberty and that objectors are offered a genuinely civilian and non-punitive alternative in line with international law (Spain); 139.78 Take steps to implement alternative service for conscientious objectors to military service in line with international standards (Slovakia); 139.79 Adopt provisions for conscientious objectors to carry out an appropriate alternative and non-punitive service of a genuinely civilian character and of a comparable length to military service, with any additional extension based on reasonable and objective criteria (Panama); 139.80 Amend the National Security Law, in particular article 7, to ensure that it is not used arbitrarily or to restrict the rights to freedom of expression, opinion and association and release all individuals unjustly charged and sentenced to prison terms solely for the legitimate exercise of their right to freedom of expression and association (Germany); 139.81 Provide for the release of all imprisoned conscientious objectors, expunge the criminal records of conscientious objectors and provide them with adequate reparation (Argentina); 139.82 Allow conscientious objectors to carry out an appropriate alternative service of a genuinely civilian character (Cyprus); 139.83 Release all conscientious objectors in detention, expunge their criminal records and grant them appropriate reparation (Luxembourg); 139.84 End the detention of conscientious objectors to military service and ensure that civilian alternatives to military service are not punitive or discriminatory and remain under civilian control (Uruguay); 139.85 objectors (Estonia); Improve civilian alternatives to the military service for conscientious 139.86 Provide alternative service options for conscientious objectors by introducing an alternative non-punitive service of genuine civilian character, under civilian control and of a length comparable to military service and ensure that alternative service is offered without unreasonable delay (Australia); 139.87 Ensure that conscientious objectors to military service can carry out genuinely civilian and non-punitive alternative service without discrimination, by reducing the length of alternative service and expanding the places of possible service (Croatia); 139.88 Continue efforts towards making alternative service for conscientious objectors of a non-punitive and civilian character (Poland); 139.89 Take measures to prevent artificial intelligence systems based on big data, including surveillance systems, from violating human rights, including the right to privacy (Costa Rica); 139.90 human trafficking (Pakistan); Further reinforce the institutional framework to tackle the menace of 139.91 Consider adopting a general law to combat human trafficking, with a focus on the protection of victims, in order to more effectively address complaints of the sexual exploitation of women, including sex workers and migrants in an irregular situation (Peru); 20 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 139.92 Continue efforts to eradicate human trafficking, including through the effective implementation of the Human Trafficking Prevention Act and by adopting a victim-protective approach (Qatar); 139.93 Ensure the establishment of a comprehensive plan to prevent human trafficking and to protect trafficking victims (Sri Lanka); 139.94 to contemporary forms of slavery (Syrian Arab Republic); Fight impunity for human trafficking crimes, especially those related 139.95 Eliminate all practice of social evil, such as trafficking in persons for sexual exploitation and forced labour and the increasingly higher rate of child crimes (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 139.96 Continue efforts towards combating human trafficking (Kyrgyzstan); 139.97 Take further measures to tackle human trafficking, particularly of women and children, and to provide effective protection to victims (Georgia); 139.98 Take all necessary measures to effectively ensure labour protection for all workers (Indonesia); 139.99 Ensure effective protection of the rights to housing, education, medical care, employment and other fields for persons in vulnerable situations (China); 139.100 Continue strengthening measures to guarantee better care for people living with HIV (Senegal); 139.101 Provide age-appropriate sex education classes, paying particular attention to the prevention of teenage pregnancy and HIV/AIDS and adequately addressing issues of sexual orientation and gender identity (Luxembourg); 139.102 Endorse the Safe Schools Declaration for the protection of schools in conflict areas (Spain); 139.103 Increase efforts to ensure that all children have access to quality education without discrimination and reduce educational disparities between rural and urban areas (Qatar); 139.104 Implement the necessary reforms to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to mitigate threats against human rights resulting from climate change, including by raising the nationally determined contribution target consistent with human rights obligations (Malaysia); its nationally determined contributions with the Paris 139.105 Align Agreement goal of limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre- industrial levels (Marshall Islands); 139.106 Ensure that non-governmental organizations and Indigenous Peoples are equally and fully represented in future climate change negotiations (Vanuatu); 139.107 Take swift action to eliminate all fossil fuels and transition to renewable energy (Vanuatu); 139.108 Further strengthen the implementation of legislation and plans aimed at eliminating that perpetuate gender-based discrimination, violence and abuse, by allocating more human and financial resources (Philippines); structures and norms 139.109 Strengthen the mandate of the National Human Rights Commission on gender and women’s rights (Colombia); 139.110 Take further steps towards reducing gender inequality, including by increasing women’s participation in the judiciary and law enforcement, in political and public life and in the private sector (Ukraine); 139.111 Combat the spread of cybercrime targeting women and girls, including through social media platforms, to ensure effective means of prevention and GE.23-03422 21 A/HRC/53/11 protection for victims and the legal prosecution of perpetrators (Syrian Arab Republic); 139.112 Consider the possibility of lifting the reservation to article 16 (1) (g) of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Paraguay); 139.113 Implement measures to ensure women’s equal participation in work life and politics, by preventing discrimination and reducing the gender pay gap (Norway); 139.114 Continue measures to enhance women’s representation in the political and public life (Nepal); 139.115 Withdraw the reservation to article 16 (1) (g) of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Namibia); 139.116 Devise and implement strategies and structural reforms towards ensuring the equal participation of women in public and political life, including their proportional representation in the National Assembly and provincial and local government councils (Marshall Islands); 139.117 Reinforce the gender and women’s rights mandate of the National Human Rights Commission of the Republic of Korea (Maldives); 139.118 Intensify efforts to promote women’s rights and to prevent and combat all forms of discrimination and violence against them, both online and offline (Italy); 139.119 Address the discrimination against women in political domains (Islamic Republic of Iran); 139.120 Encourage domestic and international private sector companies to take all appropriate measures to eliminate all forms of online discrimination and violence, including online gender-based violence and digital sex crimes (Ireland); 139.121 Strengthen efforts to combat violence against women and girls and gender-based violence (Cyprus); 139.122 Take all necessary measures to eliminate violence, discrimination and hate speech against women and girls, as well as to eradicate gender-based stereotypes and promote education on healthy sexual relationships, consent and gender-based violence, including online sex crimes (Costa Rica); 139.123 Continue its efforts in ensuring protection for women and girls against all kind of violence, harassment and abuses (Sudan); 139.124 Combat effectively, online and offline, violence against women and girls and bring the perpetrators to justice (China); 139.125 Continue the commitment towards preventing domestic violence and strengthening support services for victims of domestic violence (Sri Lanka); 139.126 Continue efforts for monitoring, preventing and combating all forms of violence and abuse against women and children, including online violence (Lithuania); 139.127 Ensure children’s fair trial rights by preventing the use of forced confessions and including legal guardians in the child’s trial proceedings (Gambia); 139.128 Introduce a universal birth registration system in the country (Azerbaijan); 139.129 Introduce comprehensive policies and strategies to address all forms of violence and abuse against children, including online violence, as well as to ensure the prevention of all forms of abuse of older persons (Serbia); 22 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 139.130 Reconsider the plan to lower the age of criminal responsibility, pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Philippines); 139.131 Develop a comprehensive strategy and an action plan for the prevention, fight and monitoring of all forms of violence and abuse against children, including online violence (Montenegro); 139.132 Consider joining the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Mongolia); 139.133 Establish universal birth registration that allows for the registration of births of all children born in the Republic of Korea, regardless of their parents’ legal or social status (Lithuania); 139.134 Continue efforts to ensure birth registration, making it available to all children regardless of the legal status of the parents or their origins (Iraq); 139.135 Adopt a housing policy that takes into account the special needs of older persons to enable them to live independently, while reducing informal settlements and households that do not reach minimum housing standards (Slovenia); 139.136 Devote sufficient funding to protect the human rights of older persons, ensure equal access to services and prevent poverty in old age, including, but not limited to, by raising the income replacement rate of the national pension to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average (Slovenia); 139.137 Improve the participation of persons with disabilities in the electoral process and public political life (Jordan); 139.138 Take measures to improve the quality of education and care institutions for persons with disabilities (New Zealand); 139.139 Eliminate the forced hospitalization of people with psychosocial disabilities and establish a community-based care system that promotes their full autonomy (Costa Rica); 139.140 Enhance the social integration of persons with disabilities by building their capacities and ensuring their fair access to employment opportunities (Qatar); 139.141 Repeal article 92 (6) of the Military Criminal Act to end restrictions on consensual same sex relations (Ireland); 139.142 Continue to take measures to tackle all forms of discrimination, including on the grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity (Israel); 139.143 Repeal article 92 (6) of the Military Criminal Act, which criminalizes consensual sexual relations between people of the same sex (Mexico); 139.144 Legalize same-sex marriage and ensure that same-sex couples are recognized as having the same rights and responsibilities as opposite-sex couples in de facto relationships (New Zealand); 139.145 Adopt comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation that prohibits discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex persons and other marginalized groups (Norway); 139.146 Adopt a generic law that addresses all cases of discrimination based on gender, sexual orientation, race or nationality, in all areas, including labour, education and access to public services (Spain); 139.147 Enact a comprehensive anti-discrimination law that prohibits all forms of discrimination, including protection for all those in the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and other community (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); GE.23-03422 23 A/HRC/53/11 legislation protecting members of 139.148 Pass anti-discrimination marginalized communities, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex and other persons, and provide legal recognition of same-sex marriage (United States of America); 139.149 Repeal the Military Criminal Act article criminalizing same-sex conduct in the military (United States of America); 139.150 Adopt a comprehensive anti-discrimination law, including protection for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, and ensure access to legal gender recognition without prerequisites (Australia); 139.151 Enact comprehensive and enforceable anti-discrimination legislation prohibiting discrimination based on, among other things, race, sexual orientation, gender identity and sex characteristics (Belgium); 139.152 Adopt an anti-discrimination forms of discrimination, including on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity, and abolish article 92 (6) of the Military Criminal Act, which criminalizes consensual same-sex relations (Canada); law prohibiting all 139.153 Eliminate the criminalization of same-sex relations in the Military Criminal Code Act (Colombia); 139.154 Take the necessary measures to eliminate discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity through the adoption of standards and the revision of study plans that promote the inclusion of all people (Costa Rica); 139.155 Ensure further efforts for the adoption of comprehensive anti- discrimination legislation prohibiting discrimination based on, among other things, sexual orientation and gender identity (Denmark); 139.156 Continue to strengthen the fight against all forms of discrimination, including those based on sexual orientation and gender identity (France); 139.157 Adopt and implement comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation, which prohibits any discrimination, notably based on sexual orientation and gender identity (Germany); 139.158 Repeal article 92 (6) of the Military Criminal Act that punishes sexual activity between same-sex military personnel with sentences of up to two years in prison (Germany); 139.159 Legalize same-sex marriage between consenting adults and legalize adoption by same-sex couples (Iceland); 139.160 Repeal article 92 (6) of the Military Criminal Act to end restrictions on consensual same-sex relations in the military (Iceland); 139.161 Stop conditioning legal gender recognition for transgender persons upon psychiatric diagnosis, medical treatment and the prohibition to marry or have children and introduce instead a transparent administrative process based on individual self-declaration (Iceland); 139.162 Strengthen the legal framework to protect and promote the rights of lesbian, gay, transgender, bisexual, intersex, queer and other persons (Colombia); 139.163 Ban conversion therapies (Iceland); 139.164 Further improve the registration of migrant children, with a view to the full realization of their right to compulsory education (Poland); 139.165 Continue consideration of the accession to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers of their Families (Kyrgyzstan). 24 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 140. The recommendation formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below has been examined by the Republic of Korea and has been noted by the Republic of Korea: 140.1 Ensure a lasting solution to unresolved cases of sexual slavery and forced labour committed by Japan during the Second World War, aimed at fulfilling the victims’ right to truth, justice and reparation on the basis of a victim-centred approach and victims’ demands (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea). 141. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. GE.23-03422 25 A/HRC/53/11 Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of the Republic of Korea was headed by Vice Minister of Justice, Ms. Lee, Noh Kong, and composed of the following members: • H.E. Mr. Yun, Seong-deok (Alternate Head of Delegation), Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Ms. Yoon, Seong-mee, Ambassador, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Ms. Yu, Jeong A, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations and other International Organizations in Geneva; • Mr. Park, Jinyoul, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations and other International Organizations in Geneva; • Ms. Yoo, Yena, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations and other International Organizations in Geneva; • Ms. Yong, Gyoung Min, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations and other International Organizations in Geneva; • Ms. Nam, Yu Jin, Political Affairs Advisor, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Ms. Lee, Yoo Sun, Director, Human Rights Support Division, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Kim, Tae Hun, Director, Unification Legal Affairs Division, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. Choi, Ji Ye, Prosecutor, Human Rights Policy Division, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. Yeo, Hyejin, Deputy Director, Human Rights Policy Division, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. Lee, Sung Ho, Deputy Director, Investigation & Enforcement Division, Ministry of Justice ; • Mr. Ji, Wongeun, Deputy Director, Crime Prevention Planning Division Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Kwak, Eun Sang, Assistant Deputy Director, Refugee Appeal Division, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Kang, Ji Yoon, Human Rights Specialist, Human Rights Policy Division, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. Jun, Hyun Shin, Deputy Director, Human Rights Policy Division, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Kim, Hae Bal Eun, Prosecutor, Department of National Security, Election and Labor (Labor Division), Supreme Prosecutors’ Office; • Ms. Hwang, Hyuni, Director, Human Rights and Social Affairs Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Kim, Siyoon, Second Secretary, Human Rights and Social Affairs Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Kim, Sangmin, Second Secretary, Human Rights and Social Affairs Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Ahn, Sungmin, Director, Military Human Rights Division, Ministry of National Defense; 26 GE.23-03422 A/HRC/53/11 • Ms. Kim, Aeryeong, Judge Advocate, Military Human Rights Division, Ministry of National Defense; • Mr. Hur, Kwon, Deputy Director, Popular Culture industry Division, Ministry of Culture, Sports, and Tourism; • Mr. Lee, Seung Yeop, Deputy Director, Division of Rights Promotion for Persons with Disabilities, Ministry of Health and Welfare; • Mr. Kim, Yeong Seo, Assistant Director, Division of International Cooperation, Ministry of Health and Welfare; • Mr. Ryu, Hyosang, Deputy Director, International Cooperation Division, Ministry of Employment and Labor; • Mr. Lim, Jongpil, Senior Deputy Director, Planning and Finance Division, Ministry of Gender Equality and Family; • Mr. Park, In Jae, Superintendent, Human Rights Protection Division, Korean National Police Agency; • Mr. Song, Seon Jong, Senior Inspector, Human Rights Protection Division, Korean National Police Agency; • Mr. Sung, Jaesik, Deputy Director, Internet Consumer Policy Division, Korea Communications Commission; • Mr. Ki, Dong Min (Advisor), Member of Parliament, National Assembly; • Mr. Jang, Dong Hyeok (Advisor), Member of Parliament, National Assembly; • Ms. Han, Myoungae (Advisor), Director, Division of Child Right Advocacy, National Center for the Rights of the Child; • Ms. Kim, Eun Young, Interpreter; • Ms. Lee, Lami, Interpreter. GE.23-03422 27