United Nations 

General Assembly 

A/HRC/42/4 

Distr.: General 
3 July 2019 

Original: English 

Human Rights Council 
Forty-second session 
9–27 September 2019 
Agenda item 6 
Universal periodic review 

  Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic 

Review* 

  Albania 

*  The annex is being circulated without formal editing, in the languages of submission only. 

GE.19-11255(E) 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A/HRC/42/4 

  Introduction 

1. 
The  Working  Group  on  the  Universal  Periodic  Review,  established  in  accordance 
with Human  Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its thirty-third session from 6 to 17 May 
2019. The review of Albania was held at the 2nd meeting, on 6 May 2019. The delegation 
of Albania was headed by Deputy Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Artemis Dralo. 
At  its  10th  meeting,  held  on  10  May  2019,  the  Working  Group  adopted  the  report  on 
Albania. 

On  15  January  2019,  the  Human  Rights  Council  selected  the  following  group  of 

2. 
rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Albania: Czechia, Philippines and Senegal. 

3. 
In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 
5/1  and  paragraph  5  of  the  annex  to  Council  resolution  16/21,  the  following  documents 
were issued for the review of Albania: 

(a) 

A  national  report  submitted/written  presentation  made  in  accordance  with 

paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/33/ALB/1); 

(b)  A  compilation  prepared  by  the  Office  of  the  United  Nations  High 
Commissioner  for  Human  Rights  (OHCHR)  in  accordance  with  paragraph  15  (b) 
(A/HRC/WG.6/33/ALB/2); 

(c) 

A  summary  prepared  by  OHCHR  in  accordance  with  paragraph  15  (c) 

(A/HRC/WG.6/33/ALB/3). 

4. 
A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Germany, Greece, Portugal, on 
behalf  of  the  Group  of  Friends  on  national  implementation,  reporting  and  follow-up, 
Slovenia,  Spain,  Sweden,  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland  and 
the  United  States  of  America  was  transmitted  to  Albania  through  the  troika.  These 
questions are available on the website of the universal periodic review. 

I.  Summary of the proceedings of the review process 

A.  Presentation by the State under review 

5. 
The  delegation  of  Albania  expressed  its  appreciation  for  the  work  of  the  Human 
Rights  Council  and  noted  that  preparation  for  the  review  had  been  a  valuable  exercise  in 
taking  stock  of  where  Albania  stood  on  the  implementation  of  its  commitments.  Albania 
was fully committed to protecting and promoting all human rights and, as a member of the 
Council  between  2015  and  2017,  it  had  contributed  actively  to  the  Council’s  work, 
including the universal periodic review. 

Albania  was  taking  concrete  measures  to  implement  justice  reform.  Law  No. 
6. 
76/2016 on addenda and amendments  to the  Constitution and a package of seven organic 
laws that contained provisions guaranteeing the independence, impartiality, professionalism 
and integrity of judges, as well as for improved accountability and monitoring mechanisms 
for the judiciary, had been adopted. In addition, the parliament had approved a package of 
23  laws  covering  all  aspects  of  judicial  reform.  The  judiciary  was  undergoing  a 
comprehensive  and  thorough  transitional  re-evaluation  process  (vetting)  with  a  view  to 
rebuilding public confidence in the judiciary. 

Albania  had  improved  its  national  legal  framework  on  gender  equality  and  the 
7. 
empowerment of women. A law on measures against violence in family relations had been 
adopted in 2018 and its framework for implementation had been completed. Laws on State 
legal assistance and on social housing programmes had been adopted in 2018, and in 2015 
the Labour Code had been amended to shift the burden of proof in  cases of discrimination 
in  employment  to  the  employer.  Albania  was  implementing  the  National  Strategy  on 
Gender Equality and Action Plan 2016–2020, the National Employment and Skills Strategy 
2014–2020,  the  National  Strategy  for  Social  Protection  2015–2020,  which  prioritized 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vulnerable families and groups, and the Action Plan for Supporting Entrepreneurial Women 
2014–2020. 

8. 
Support services  for victims  of domestic  violence had been improved, in line  with 
the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women 
and  Domestic  Violence  (Istanbul  Convention),  through  the  establishment  of  the  National 
Centre and Counselling Line for Victims of Domestic Violence and emergency centres in 
some  municipalities,  as  well  as  the  first  crisis  management  centre  for  victims  of  sexual 
violence. 

Albania  had  adopted  Law  No.  18/2017  on  the  rights  and  protection  of  the  child, 
9. 
which extended the scope of children’s rights, with a focus on strengthening the system of 
protection of children from violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect. Law No. 121/2016 on 
social care services also had a focus on the support and empowerment of children. Albania 
had  started  transforming  its  residential  social  care  institutions  into  alternative  services, 
through  foster  care  and  the  establishment  of  multifunctional  centres,  and  had  compiled  a 
policy  document  for  the  deinstitutionalization  of  the  residential  social  care  system  and  a 
three-year  action  plan  for  that  purpose.  Measures  had  also  been  taken  for  parental 
rehabilitation, with the aim of returning children to their families. A  “baby bonus”, a cash 
payment for every newborn child, had been introduced at the start of 2019. 

10.  Albania  had  adopted  the  Code  of  Criminal  Justice  for  Children  aimed  at  the 
protection of children in contact and conflict with the law. Under Law No. 18/2017 on the 
rights  and  protection  of  the  child,  children  under  the  age  of  criminal  responsibility  were 
considered  as  children  in  need  of  special  protection.  In  addition,  amendments  to  the 
Criminal Code and a decision of the Council of Ministers of 2019 included harsher punitive 
measures for child abusers, including those responsible for the online abuse of children. 

11.  A  national  action  plan  for  the  protection  of  children  from  economic  exploitation, 
including children in street situations, had been drafted and procedures had been adopted to 
identify and assist economically abused children and children in street situations. 

12.  Albania had also made amendments to the law on civil status, addressing the causes 
of  non-registration  at  birth  and  statelessness,  and  empowering  courts  to  regulate  the 
registration  of  Albanian  children  coming  from  other  countries  with  incorrect  data.  The 
establishment of an electronic register had enabled the immediate registration of newborns 
in the hospital. 

13.  Albania  had  significantly  improved  its  legal  framework  for  the  protection  of 
minorities  by  adopting  a  specific  law  on  national  minorities  in  2017.  The  secondary 
legislation  was  now  under  preparation.  The  law  provided  for  the  collection  of  data  on 
persons  belonging  to  national  minorities,  based  on  the  right  to  self-identification,  the 
documentation of the Civil Registry and the legislation on the protection of personal data. 
The law guaranteed the right of individuals to declare whether they belonged to a national 
minority. Albania would further revise its domestic legislation, including the legislation on 
the  census,  in  line  with  the  European  standards.  The  next  population  and  housing  census 
would be conducted in 2020. The draft law on the census provided, among others, for the 
inclusion  of  questions  about  ethnic  origin,  religion  and  language,  with  responses  to  be 
based  on  a  free  and  non-mandatory  declaration  and  the  option  not  to  respond  to  the 
question. 

14. 
In 2018 decisions had been adopted concerning education in minority languages, the 
promotion of the culture, history, language and religion of national minorities in education 
and  the  organization  and  functioning  of  the  Committee  for  National  Minorities.  Persons 
belonging to national minorities, in self-government units where they lived traditionally or 
in  substantial  numbers,  could  be  taught  in  their  minority  language.  The  responsible 
institutions  had  prepared  a  draft  decision  establishing  a  threshold  of  15  pupils  for  the 
opening  of  a  minority  class  in  places  where  national  minorities  lived  traditionally  or 
constituted  over  20  per  cent  of  the  population  of  the  administrative  unit.  In  such  places, 
persons belonging to national minorities had the right to use their language in interactions 
with  the  administrative  authorities  in  the  self-governing  units,  when  relevant  conditions 
permitted and there was sufficient demand. 

A/HRC/42/4 

3 

 
A/HRC/42/4 

B. 

Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 

15.  During the interactive dialogue, 66 delegations made statements. Recommendations 
made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 

Sweden  welcomed  the  ongoing  justice  reform  and  supported  the  strengthening  of 
16. 
human rights through bilateral cooperation, including in the areas of the rights of the child, 
freedom of expression and gender equality. Sweden nonetheless encouraged further efforts 
to ensure access to justice for all. 

17. 
Switzerland  congratulated  Albania  for  improving  its  legal  framework  to  protect 
national  minorities  and  welcomed  the  adoption  of  the  law  on  the  rights  and  protection  of 
children.  However,  it  expressed  concern  regarding  the  living  conditions  of  psychiatric 
patients and detainees with mental disorders. 

18. 

The Syrian Arab Republic made recommendations. 

19.  Ukraine  welcomed  the  commitment  of  Albania  to  gender  equality  and  the 
empowerment  of  women.  It  commended  the  adoption  of  the  National  Agenda  for 
Children’s  Rights  and  strategies  and  action  plans  in  the  areas  of  juvenile  justice,  persons 
with disabilities and human trafficking, and measures aimed at the integration of Roma and 
Egyptians. 

The  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland  welcomed  the 
20. 
endorsement  by  Albania  of  the  call  to  action  to  end  forced  labour,  modern  slavery  and 
human  trafficking  and  commended  progress  made  towards  judicial  reform  and  the 
establishment of several judicial bodies. It urged Albania to make further efforts to tackle 
organized crime gangs involved in trafficking in persons. 

21. 
The United States of America welcomed the reforms to protect victims of trafficking 
in  persons  but  remained  concerned  about  corruption  among  the  police,  prosecutors  and 
judges,  including  complicity  in  human  trafficking.  It  commended  training  and  vetting  for 
security officials and the creation of the High Judicial Council and the High Prosecutorial 
Council. 

22.  Uruguay  welcomed  the  efforts  in  recent  years  to  align  national  legislation  with 
human rights conventions that Albania had ratified, and commended the measures adopted 
to realize and guarantee the rights of persons belonging to national minorities. 

23. 
The  Bolivarian  Republic  of  Venezuela  welcomed  the  National  Strategy  for  Social 
Protection  2015–2020  designed  to  fight  socioeconomic  inequality  and  appreciated  the 
programme to prevent dropout from compulsory education and to provide education for all 
without discrimination. 

24.  Yemen welcomed the Cross-Sectoral Justice Strategy 2017–2020 and its action plan 
aimed  at  strengthening  the  independence,  efficiency  and  accountability  of  the  judicial 
system. It also noted the National Strategy for Social Protection 2015–2020, establishing a 
unified system of social security.  

25.  Algeria  welcomed steps taken to improve and strengthen  human rights, notably by 
ratifying most of the international human rights instruments. It also welcomed the adoption 
of  laws  to  consolidate  the  legal  and  institutional  framework,  taking  into  account  the 
recommendations from the previous review. 

26.  Argentina  congratulated  Albania  for  the  establishment  of  the  inter-institutional 
working  group  for  the  preparation  of  its  national  report  and  the  adoption  of  the  National 
Agenda  for  Children’s  Rights.  It  welcomed  the  fact  that  Albania  was  a  party  to  the  Safe 
Schools Declaration. 

27.  Australia  commended  the  commitment  of  Albania  to  human  rights  and  legislative 
and  judicial  reform  to  address  corruption.  However,  it  noted  that  challenges  remained, 
including in ensuring the promotion and protection of the rights of women and girls, people 
with disabilities and minorities. 

4 

 
 
28.  Austria commended the ratification of international instruments and the adoption of 
laws and action plans. It noted that progress remained to be  made in the area of property 
rights,  the  eradication  of  corruption  and  the  social  integration  of  minorities.  It  was 
concerned  about  reports  of  the  persistence  of  domestic  violence  against  women  and 
children. 

29. 
Belgium  commended  Albania  for  the  amendment  of  the  law  on  domestic  violence 
and the adoption of the law on the rights and protection of  the child. It believed, however, 
that  there  was  room  for  improvement,  in  particular  regarding  the  fight  against  corruption 
and women’s and children’s rights. 

30. 
Brazil welcomed the constitutional amendments of 2016 and encouraged Albania to 
improve  the  procedures  to  issue  identification  and  travel  documents  for  refugees  and 
asylum  seekers.  It  also  encouraged  Albania  to  promote  social  inclusion  to  address  the 
specific  needs  of  vulnerable  populations  and  to  make  progress  in  the  fight  against 
trafficking in persons. 

31. 
Brunei  Darussalam  welcomed  progressive  steps  to  combat  child  exploitation  and 
welcomed  the  work  to  develop  a  national  action  plan  for  the  protection  of  children  from 
economic exploitation. It commended Albania for the introduction of the National Agenda 
for Children’s Rights. 

32. 
Bulgaria commended the steps taken to reinforce the protection of the human rights 
of persons belonging to national minorities. It noted with appreciation that the law on the 
protection of national minorities had recognized for the first time all national minorities in 
the country, including the Bulgarian national minority. 

33. 
Canada welcomed measures taken to strengthen equality between men and women. 
It noted, however, that additional measures could be taken to ensure the full respect for the 
fundamental rights of all. 

34. 
Chile welcomed the implementation of the  National Agenda for Children’s Rights, 
the  progress  on  legislation  to  eliminate  discrimination  against  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual, 
transgender and intersex persons and the implementation of the third National Strategy on 
Gender  Equality  2016–2020.  It  also  welcomed  the  ratification  of  core  human  rights 
instruments and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. 

China  welcomed  the  positive  promotion  of  social  and  economic  development  and 
35. 
the State’s commitment to realizing the Sustainable Development Goals and the promotion 
and protection of human rights. It noted that Albania had strengthened the protection of the 
rights  of  vulnerable  groups,  striven  to  eliminate  domestic  violence,  raised  the  level  of 
compulsory  education  and  actively  fought  trafficking  in  persons,  formulating  relevant 
national strategies. 

36. 
Costa Rica acknowledged the progress in judicial reform and the amendments to the 
Electoral  Code  to  increase  the  participation  of  women.  It  noted  that  Albania  should 
strengthen services for women victims of violence and their families and improve access to 
housing, health care and education for minorities. 

37. 
Croatia  positively  noted  the  determination  of  Albania  to  continue  the  fight  against 
corruption  and  organized  crime.  It  welcomed  the  adoption  of  the  law  on  the  rights  and 
protection of the child and invited Albania to further improve the protection of children and 
victims of trafficking in persons. 

38. 
Cyprus welcomed steps taken to implement the recommendations from the previous 
cycle  of  the  universal  periodic  review,  notably  the  amendments  to  the  Criminal  Code 
regarding gender violence and the adoption of the National Strategy on Gender Equality. It 
congratulated Albania for signing and ratifying international and regional conventions. 

39. 
Czechia appreciated the adoption of the Code of Criminal Justice for Children, the 
Juvenile Justice Strategy, the National Strategy on the Fight against Human Trafficking, the 
National Strategy on Gender Equality and legislation on persons with disabilities, domestic 
violence and the integration of Roma. 

A/HRC/42/4 

5 

 
40.  Denmark commended Albania for its progress in combating domestic violence but 
was  concerned  about  the  inadequate  number  of  shelter  spaces  for  victims  and  the 
requirements for obtaining shelter spaces. 

41. 
Egypt  welcomed  the  measures  taken  to  amend  legislation  and  develop  institutions 
for  the  promotion  and  protection  of  human  rights.  It  commended  the  adoption  of  the 
National Strategy on Gender Equality and efforts to fight human trafficking and develop a 
strategy to protect street children. 

42. 
Estonia  welcomed  the  adoption  of  several  national  strategies  and  action  plans, 
including  the  National  Strategy  on  the  Fight  against  Human  Trafficking  and  the  National 
Agenda  for  Children’s  Rights.  It  commended  the  amendments  to  the  law  on  measures 
against domestic violence and encouraged further efforts in that regard. 

Fiji  congratulated  Albania  for  being  the  first  country  in  its  region  to  develop  an 
43. 
action  plan  and  online  platform  on  human  rights  and  being  a  party  to  the  three  Rio 
conventions. Fiji noted the absence of climate change and environmental information in the 
national report. 

France  welcomed  the  efforts  made  by  the  Albanian  authorities  since  2013  to 
44. 
harmonize  national  legislation  with  its  international  obligations  in  the  areas  of  child 
protection, domestic violence, minorities and persons with disabilities. 

45.  Georgia  welcomed  steps  aimed  at  harmonizing  the  national  framework  with 
international  human  rights  instruments  and  commended  Albania  for  numerous  strategies 
that it had adopted, including the National Strategy on the Fight against Human Trafficking. 
It also  welcomed amendments to laws against domestic violence and on the  protection of 
children’s rights. 

46.  Germany  commended  the  progress  made  with  regard  to  judicial  reform,  aimed  at 
strengthening  the  independence,  efficiency  and  accountability  of  judicial  institutions  and 
fighting  corruption.  It  remained  concerned  about  the  freedom  of  expression  and 
independence of the media and the protection of minorities and individual property rights.  

47.  Ghana  noted  the  adoption  of  numerous  domestic  laws  and  welcomed  the  Cross-
Sectoral Justice Strategy 2017–2020 and its Action Plan, as  well as the  Code  of Criminal 
Justice  for  Children.  It  encouraged  Albania  to  ensure  implementation  of  those  positive 
measures. 

48.  Greece  expressed  appreciation  for  efforts  to  implement  the  recommendations  from 
the  second review cycle  and for the vetting process of the judiciary. It expressed concern 
over  the  police  operation  to  remove  bilingual  road  signs  bearing  place  names  in  the 
municipality of Finiq. 

49.  Honduras  commended  the  ratification  of  the  main  international  human  rights 
instruments and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. It acknowledged the 
constitutional amendments of July 2016 leading to a legislative reform aimed at complying 
with international human rights standards. 

50. 
Responding to the interventions, the delegation of Albania noted that the State aimed 
to reduce poverty among Roma and Egyptian  minorities and discrimination against them. 
The Social Inclusion Policy Document 2016–2020, a national monitoring framework with 
indicators on poverty reduction, employment,  health, education, basic needs, participation 
and  human  rights,  tackled  social  inclusion  through  a  cross-disciplinary  approach.  The 
National  Action  Plan  on  Roma  and  Egyptians  2016–2020  aimed  at  inclusion,  civil 
registration, promotion of employment and entitlement to social benefits. 

51.  Albania  had  improved  its  legal  framework  against  trafficking  in  human  beings  by 
adopting  Standard  Operating  Procedures  and  the  National  Action  Plan  to  Combat 
Trafficking  in  Persons  2018–2020.  Anti-trafficking  structures  had  strengthened  their 
investigative capacities for early identification inside and outside the country based on the 
Standard  Operating  Procedures.  The  Government  was  also  financing  non-governmental 
organizations that provided social services for victims of trafficking. 

A/HRC/42/4 

6 

 
Several  measures  had  been  taken  against  the  phenomenon  of  “blood  feud”.  The 
52. 
General  Directorate  of  State  Police  had  compiled  a  database  of  all  families  affected  by 
blood  feud.  In  2018,  Albania  had  adopted  an  action  plan  on  the  prevention,  detection, 
documentation  and  fight  against  criminal  acts  committed  for  motives  of  blood  feud  and 
vengeance. 

53.  Albania  had  amended  Law  No.  69/2012  on  the  pre-university  education  system  in 
order  to  provide  a  more  effective  mechanism  to  implement  the  right  to  education  for  all 
without  distinction.  Several  activities  had  been  undertaken  to  ensure  quality,  equal  and 
inclusive education, including through the integration of children with disabilities into the 
mainstream educational system of kindergartens and schools. The number of dropouts had 
also  decreased.  Roma  and  Egyptian  children  were  provided  with  scholarships  to  attend 
higher and vocational education. 

Concerning  the  rights  of  persons  with  disabilities,  Law  No.  93/2014  provided  for 
54. 
independent living and for support in overcoming barriers. It introduced community-based 
services based on the principles of the social model of disability. 

55.  Albania had taken measures to enforce the law in penitentiary institutions, including 
zero tolerance for any forms of abuse of power and significantly improving the conditions 
of detention. The issue of prison overcrowding had been tackled and at present the country 
was  witnessing  prison  depopulation,  with  900  places  available,  or  a  14  per  cent  vacancy 
rate, due to the opening of a new prison in Shkodra, and the construction of two new prison 
buildings in Tirana. 

56.  An  ad  hoc  parliamentary  committee  on  electoral  reform,  established  in  2017,  was 
reviewing  a  draft  law  on  amendments  to  the  Electoral  Code,  prepared  on  the  basis  of 
recommendations of international and local experts. 

57.  Albania  had  a  Human  Rights  Action  Plan  and  Monitoring  Mechanism  to  facilitate 
monitoring  by  relevant  State  authorities  of  the  implementation  of  recommendations  of 
United Nations human rights mechanisms. 

58.  Albania  was  also  implementing  the  National  Action  Plan  for  Lesbian,  Gay, 
Bisexual,  Transgender  and  Intersex  Persons  and  provided  support  to  non-governmental 
organizations working on the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex 
community.  It  had  established  a  free  helpline  for  victims  of  violence,  including  child 
victims. 

59. 
The  Law  on  the  Establishment  of  the  State  Cadastral  Agency  had  been  adopted  in 
2018. It aimed at improved registration of immovable property, correcting inaccuracies and 
updating data on immovable property. 

60. 
Increased resources had been allocated to the Commissioner for Children’s Rights, 
the People’s Advocate and the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination, including 
increases in salaries and staff. 

61. 
In  conclusion,  the  delegation  highlighted  that  Albania  was  among  the  top  five 
countries in terms of the level of representation of women in the Government, with women 
accounting  for  more  than  50  per  cent  of  ministers  and  40  per  cent  of  members  of  the 
parliament. Out of 61 municipalities, 59 had focal points for gender equality. 

62. 
Iceland  welcomed  steps  taken  by  Albania  in  enacting  criminal  and  civil  laws  that 
addressed  domestic  violence  and  noted  the  increase  in  criminal  prosecutions  of  domestic 
violence in recent years, as well as the increase in prosecutions for repeat offences and for 
violating civil protection orders. 

63. 
India  appreciated  the  midterm  review  report  of  Albania  and  positively  noted  the 
establishment  of  the  Permanent  Parliamentary  Subcommittee  on  Gender  Equality  and 
Prevention  of  Violence  against  Women.  India  commended  the  adoption  of  the  National 
Strategy on Gender Equality and the National Agenda for Children’s Rights. 

64. 
Indonesia  welcomed  the  organic  laws  adopted  to  enhance  the  judicial  reform.  It 
commended  the  adoption  of  the  law  on  the  rights  and  protection  of  the  child  and  the 

A/HRC/42/4 

7 

 
A/HRC/42/4 

National Agenda for Children’s Rights, as well as efforts to increase the number of women 
representatives in the parliament. 

65. 
The Islamic Republic of Iran expressed concern over the continued abuse of the land 
and sovereignty of Albania by the Monafeghin-e Khalge  Organization (MKO), which had 
violated the  human rights of  its own  members, and questioned the decision  of  Albania  to 
provide refuge to the organization. 

66. 
Iraq welcomed the Cross-Sectoral Justice Strategy 2017–2020 on strengthening the 
independence of judicial institutions. It commended the national plans for child protection 
and the elimination of discrimination and violence against women and the national strategy 
on  the  prevention  of  violent  extremism  and  radicalization  leading  to  terrorism  for  2015–
2020. 

Ireland  acknowledged  the  State’s  efforts  to  advance  human  rights,  welcomed  the 
67. 
development  and  implementation  of  comprehensive  reform  strategies  across  the  public 
sector, including the justice system, and encouraged Albania to continue building effective, 
accountable  and  inclusive  institutions  at  all  levels  in  line  with  Sustainable  Development 
Goal 16. 

68. 
Israel  commended  Albania  for  the  progress  made  since  its  previous  review, 
including the adoption of national strategies to reform the justice sector, protect children’s 
rights,  promote  gender  equality  and  fight  human  trafficking  and  the  introduction  of 
legislation on the inclusion of and accessibility for persons with disabilities. 

69. 
Italy  appreciated  the  improvements  to  the  justice  system.  It  acknowledged  steps 
taken  to  fight  corruption  and  encouraged  Albania  to  pursue  its  efforts  in  that  field.  It 
commended  the  adoption  of  laws  on  juvenile  justice  and  progress  in  the  fight  against 
domestic and gender-based violence. 

Jordan  welcomed  strategies  and  legislative  amendments  adopted  by  Albania  to 

70. 
develop its legislative framework to promote and protect human rights. 

Lithuania  commended  Albania  for 

to  human  rights  and 
71. 
acknowledged the progress made since the previous universal periodic review. It welcomed 
especially the adoption of the law on the rights and protection of the child. 

its  commitment 

72.  Madagascar  welcomed  the  progress  in  the  promotion  and  protection  of  human 
rights, in particular in the area of discrimination and violence against women and domestic 
violence.  It  noted  the  adoption  of  the  National  Strategy  on  the  Fight  against  Human 
Trafficking 2018–2020 and other legislative developments. 

73.  Malaysia  welcomed  the  efforts  of  Albania  to  strengthen  the  protection  and 
promotion  of  human  rights, 
including  by  harmonizing  national  regulations  with 
international obligations and improving the legal framework, particularly in the areas of the 
rights of children, women, persons with disabilities and minority rights. 

74.  Maldives  commended  the  adoption  of  laws  and  strategies  related  to  education  and 
disability,  including  the  Strategy  on  the  Development  of  Pre-University  Education  2014–
2020. 

75.  Malta  welcomed  the  efforts  to  increase  safeguards  against  violations  relating  to 
domestic  and  gender-based  violence,  child  protection  and  exploitation,  lesbian,  gay, 
bisexual, transgender and intersex persons and persons with disabilities. 

76.  Mexico  recognized  the  progress  made,  particularly  the  adoption  of  the  Code  of 
Criminal Justice for Children, the law on the provision of free legal aid for children and the 
national  strategy  on  the  prevention  of  violent  extremism  and  radicalization  leading  to 
terrorism. 

77.  Montenegro  welcomed  the  Code  of  Criminal  Justice  for  Children,  the  National 
Agenda  for  Children’s  Rights  and  the  law  on  national  minorities.  It  commended  the 
National Strategy on Gender Equality, measures to affirm women’s representation in public 
life and the National Referral Mechanism for cases of domestic violence. 

8 

 
78.  Myanmar noted the submission of the universal periodic review midterm report and 
the establishment of an online platform to monitor the implementation of human rights. It 
hoped  that  the  various  national  strategies  adopted  would  benefit  the  socioeconomic 
development of citizens, particularly vulnerable groups. 

The  Netherlands  commended  the  national  action  plan  on  women  and  peace  and 
79. 
security  and  encouraged  Albania  to  streamline  the  plan  with  the  gender  mainstreaming 
policy and the National Strategy on Gender Equality. It also commended the enhancement 
of the legal framework on domestic violence but was concerned about its implementation. 

Pakistan appreciated the efforts to eradicate corruption, particularly the Action Plan 
80. 
for  the  Implementation  of  the  Anti-Corruption  Cross-cutting  Strategy  for  2015–2020.  It 
welcomed  the  adoption  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Justice  for  Children  and  the  Juvenile 
Justice Strategy. 

81. 
The  Philippines  acknowledged  the  justice  reform  to  bring  national  human  rights 
guarantees into conformity with international standards, the efforts aimed at protecting the 
rights  of  the  child  and  progress  in  increasing  women’s  representation  in  public 
administration and their access to economic support. 

82. 
Poland  noted  progress  in  a  wide  range  of  human  rights  areas  and  the  efforts  to 
strengthen the legal and institutional human rights framework, particularly the release of the 
National Strategy on the Fight against Human Trafficking 2018–2020. 

Portugal welcomed the commitment of Albania to respect and protect human rights 

83. 
and made recommendations. 

84.  Qatar  commended  legislative  measures  and  national  plans  on  children’s  rights, 
including the National Agenda for Children’s Rights, the steps taken to enhance access to 
education for vulnerable children and the adoption of the Strategy on the Development of 
Pre-University Education. 

85. 
The Republic of Moldova welcomed the midterm report of Albania and commended 
the  National  Strategy  on  Gender  Equality  and  Action  Plan,  amendments  to  the  Electoral 
Code, the establishment of the national referral mechanism for cases of domestic violence 
and efforts to combat human trafficking. 

86. 
Romania welcomed the adoption of the law for the protection of national minorities, 
which eliminated the distinction between national and linguistic minorities, and the law on 
the treatment of property and finalization of the process of compensation of property. 

The  Russian  Federation  noted  the  difficult  human  rights  situation  in  Albania  and 

87. 
made recommendations. 

88. 
Senegal welcomed the adoption of the national strategy on the prevention of violent 
extremism and radicalization leading to terrorism accompanied by a plan of action and the 
introduction  of  the  pilot  school  programme  on  religion  and  religious  coexistence  to 
strengthen pupils’ resilience in the face of violent extremist views. 

Serbia commended the efforts of Albania to implement the recommendations made 

89. 
at the previous review. 

Singapore commended the emphasis Albania placed on the best interests of the child 
90. 
as  a  guiding  principle,  which  was  well  reflected  in  laws,  policies  and  institutions.  It  also 
commended the zero-tolerance policy with regard to violence against women and domestic 
violence,  demonstrated  through  amendments  to  its  legislation  and  services  to  victims  of 
domestic violence. 

91. 
Slovakia commended the constitutional amendments  made  in 2016, the law on the 
rights and protection of the child and the National Agenda for Children’s Rights. However, 
it  took  note  of  the  reports  indicating  that  children  continued  to  be  exposed  to  violence in 
different settings, including at home. 

92. 
Slovenia  commended  efforts  to  address  domestic  violence  and  violence  against 
women and encouraged Albania to continue its efforts for the empowerment of women and 

A/HRC/42/4 

9 

 
A/HRC/42/4 

gender  equality.  It  also  commended  the  efforts  to  reform  the  judicial  system  and 
encouraged Albania to strengthen the implementation of its legislation on human rights. 

93. 
Spain congratulated Albania on its ratification of the Council of Europe Convention 
on  Preventing  and  Combating  Violence  against  Women  and  Domestic  Violence.  It  noted 
that the Family Code of Albania prohibited same-sex marriage and that there was no legal 
recognition of same-sex unions. 

94. 
The  delegation  of  Albania  concluded  by  thanking  all  the  member  and  observer 
States that had participated in the universal periodic review of Albania, as well as OHCHR, 
civil society and the troika, for their constructive cooperation with Albania throughout the 
process. 

II.  Conclusions and/or recommendations 

95. 
The  following  recommendations  will  be  examined  by  Albania,  which  will 
provide  responses  in  due  time,  but  no  later  than  the  forty-second  session  of  the 
Human Rights Council: 

95.1 
of the International Labour Organization (Denmark); 

Ratify the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169) 

95.2 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Portugal); 

Ratify  the  Optional  Protocol  to  the  International  Covenant  on 

95.3 
(Senegal); 

Sign  and  ratify  the  Treaty  on  the  Prohibition  of  Nuclear  Weapons 

Adhere  to  the  Optional  Protocol  to  the  Convention  on the  Rights  of 
95.4 
Persons with Disabilities and adopt the necessary measures for its  correct and 
comprehensive implementation (Spain); 

Adopt  an  open,  merit-based  process  when  selecting  national 
95.5 
candidates for United Nations treaty body elections (United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland); 

95.6 
Increase  budget  allocations  from  the  central  Government  to  enable 
the establishment of ombudsman offices in all regions of the country (Sweden); 

95.7 
and financial resources to enable it to deliver on its mandate (Ghana); 

Provide  the  Office  of  the  People’s  Advocate  with  adequate  human 

Provide sufficient financial and human resources to the Office of the 
95.8 
People’s  Advocate  and  guarantee  that  it  is  fully  independent  in  its  tasks 
(Mexico); 

95.9 
Allocate  more  human  and  financial  resources  to  the  Office  of  the 
People’s Advocate, as a precondition for the effective promotion of the rights of 
vulnerable groups (Montenegro); 

95.10 
of the People’s Advocate (Greece); 

Increase resources to independent authorities, especially to the Office 

95.11 
independent national human rights institution (Ukraine); 

Increase financial resources to ensure the adequate functioning of the 

95.12 
mechanisms in Albania (Yemen); 

Continue  its  efforts  to  strengthen  the  role  of  national  human  rights 

95.13 
Continue implementing policy measures on human rights promotion 
and  protection  and  provide  sufficient  and  appropriate  human  and  financial 
resources to carry out its action plans (Philippines); 

95.14 
obligations in the field of human rights (Qatar); 

Continue  harmonizing  national  regulations  with 

international 

10 

 
 
95.15 
international obligations in the field of human rights protection (Yemen); 

to  harmonize  national  regulations  with 

its  efforts 

Continue 

95.16 
strengthening national policies and programmes (Malaysia); 

Continue  efforts 

to  promote  and  protect  human  rights  by 

95.17 
Take  concrete  and  effective  action  to  eliminate  discrimination  faced 
by  Roma,  Egyptian  and  other  minorities,  and  ensure  access  to  services, 
education and employment (Australia); 

Fight  discrimination  against  persons  belonging  to  minorities, 
95.18 
including  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender  and  intersex  persons,  and 
accelerate the adoption of legislation for the application of the laws on persons 
belonging to minorities, persons with disabilities and free legal aid (France); 

Promote  and  protect  the  human  rights  of  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual, 
95.19 
transgender  and  intersex  persons  and  take  measures  to  combat  structural 
discrimination (Iceland); 

Take  effective  measures  against  persisting  discrimination  against 
95.20 
lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender  and 
intersex  persons,  ensure  non-
discriminatory  access  for  such  persons  to  health  services  and  introduce 
education  about  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender  and  intersex  persons  into 
the school curriculum (Czechia); 

95.21 
Ensure that lesbian, gay, bisexual,  transgender and intersex persons 
are protected from stigma and discrimination in access to health care by, inter 
alia,  introducing  training  on  the  rights  of  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender 
and intersex persons for all health personnel and awareness-raising campaigns 
on equal access to health care (Portugal); 

95.22 
Amend  the  Family  Code  to  provide  legal  recognition  for  same-sex 
partnerships  and  adopt  provisions  that  allow  for  legal  gender  recognition  of 
trans individuals (Iceland); 

95.23 
Intensify  efforts  to  protect  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender  and 
intersex  individuals  from  acts  of  violence,  discrimination  and  harassment  by 
fully  implementing  the  National  Action  Plan  for  Lesbian,  Gay,  Bisexual, 
Transgender  and  Intersex  Persons  2016–2020 and  amending  the  Family  Code 
to provide legal recognition of same-sex partnerships (Ireland); 

95.24 
Consider  amending  the  Family  Code  to  provide  legal  recognition  of 
same-sex  partnerships  and  adopt  legal  provisions  that  will  allow  legal  gender 
recognition for transgender individuals (Malta); 

95.25 
Reform the Family Code so as to give legal recognition to couples of 
the  same  sex,  fight  against  discrimination  and  hate  crimes  based  on  sexual 
orientation  and  gender  identity  and  guarantee  access  to  health  services  for 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons (Mexico); 

95.26 
Develop  a  legal  framework  that  recognizes  at  least  same-sex  civil 
unions  adopt  measures  so  that  gender  recognition  is  based  on  a  self-
identification  process  and  is  free  from  abusive  requirements,  and  prohibit 
medical  intervention  on  intersex  minors  when  there  is  no  strict  medical 
necessity (Spain); 

Enhance  efforts  to  implement  the  National  Action  Plan  for  Lesbian, 
95.27 
Gay,  Bisexual,  Transgender  and  Intersex  Persons,  particularly  the  review  of 
academic  curricula  on  gender  stereotypes  and  gender  identity,  in  line  with 
Sustainable Development Goals 5 and 10 (Netherlands); 

Strengthen  its  national  disaster  preparedness  plans  to  ensure  that 
95.28 
appropriate  national  and  local  measures  are  in  place  to  adapt  to  changing 
climate conditions and to reduce risks from future disasters (Fiji); 

A/HRC/42/4 

11 

 
A/HRC/42/4 

Take  into  account  the  vulnerabilities  and  needs  of  women,  children, 
95.29 
youth, elderly persons, persons with disabilities, indigenous persons and other 
marginalized groups in developing policies on climate change and disaster risk 
management (Fiji); 

Continue  to  build  institutional  capacity,  data  and  knowledge  to 
95.30 
integrate environmental and climate considerations more fully into the national 
regulatory 
for 
implementation and compliance monitoring across major sectors (Fiji); 

framework  and  develop  new  capacities  and  systems 

95.31 
when drafting new national strategies (Myanmar); 

Incorporate policies to meet relevant Sustainable Development Goals 

Take  necessary  measures 

95.32 
to  comply  with  counter-terrorism 
resolutions and to prevent recruitment of terrorist combatants in Albania, who 
travel abroad to join terrorist organizations fighting in other countries (Syrian 
Arab Republic); 

95.33 
Comply  with  international  obligations  to  combat  terrorism  by 
stopping the provision of safe haven to the Monafeghin-e Khalge Organization 
(Islamic Republic of Iran); 

95.34 
End  impunity  for  acts  of  terrorism  committed  by  members  of  the 
Monafeghin-e  Khalge  Organization  and  bring  them  to  justice  by  either 
extraditing or prosecuting the culprits (Islamic Republic of Iran); 

95.35 
Investigate  serious  and  systematic  violations  of  human  rights  by  the 
Monafeghin-e  Khalge  Organization  against  its  own  members,  in  particular 
women (Islamic Republic of Iran); 

95.36 
Take  urgent  measures  to  support  those  who  have  managed  to  free 
themselves  from  the  horrible  Monafeghin-e  Khalge  Organization  training 
camps, as the defectors are subject to regular harassment and threats and are 
not allowed to leave Albania (Islamic Republic of Iran); 

95.37 
Take concrete  measures to remedy the grievances of the  respectable 
people  of  Manez,  Durres  County,  who  are  inflicted  with  the  scourge  of  a 
terrorist cult in their previously peaceful locality (Islamic Republic of Iran); 

95.38 
Improve  prison  conditions,  particularly  overcrowding,  and  ensure 
adequate  care  for  prisoners  with  disabilities  and  mental  health  concerns 
(Australia); 

Improve  living  conditions,  notably  at  the  Zaharia  special  centre  for 
95.39 
sick  prisoners  in  Kruja  and  the  prison  hospital  in  Tirana,  in  line  with  its 
international obligations, and develop rapidly a plan to build a new psychiatric 
penitentiary facility (Switzerland); 

95.40 
Enhance the protection of the human rights of detainees by ensuring 
that they have access to decent living conditions and medical care and are not 
physically  mistreated.  In  this  regard,  implement  the  thorough  penitentiary 
reform envisaged in the national report, investigate all allegations of torture or 
law 
ill-treatment,  prosecute 
enforcement  officials  that  any  acts  of  abuse  towards  arrested  individuals  are 
unacceptable and will be punished (Poland); 

those  responsible  and  regularly 

instruct 

95.41 
of detention in line with international standards (Russian Federation); 

Reform the penitentiary system in order to ensure humane conditions 

95.42 
Appropriate  sufficient  funds  to  support  the  Ministry  of  Interior’s 
vetting  system  under  the  law  on  vetting  of  the  State  Police,  the  Republican 
Guard and the Police Internal Affairs Service (United States of America); 

95.43 
Take steps to finally halt blood feud killings and provide women and 
children  affected  by  that  practice  with  adequate  economic  aid  and  social 
services (Czechia); 

12 

 
A/HRC/42/4 

95.44 
feuds and vendettas (Malta);  

Consider  enacting  legislation  that  promotes  the  elimination  of  blood 

95.45 
cultural and economic factors that support them (Russian Federation); 

Adopt  a  strategy  to  fight  blood  feuds  and  eliminate  the  social, 

95.46 
Take  steps  to  combat  hate  speech  allegedly  perpetrated  by  public 
figures, including politicians, and ensure that data regarding prosecutions and 
convictions are made public to serve as a deterrent to others (Ghana); 

Investigate  and  sanction  cases  of  racist  hate  speech  or  incitement  to 
95.47 
racial hatred and punish perpetrators of acts of violence and racially motivated 
hate crimes, including politicians and representatives of the media (Argentina); 

95.48 
Take  legal  and  administrative  measures  to  prevent  and  punish  hate 
speech  and  hate  crimes  against  migrants  and  the  Roma  community  and  to 
guarantee the rights of migrants to health, education, housing and other basic 
services (Mexico); 

Strengthen policies to combat violent offences and hate crimes based 
95.49 
on sexual orientation and gender identity by establishing more solid links  with 
civil  society  and  guaranteeing  the  implementation  of  legal  provisions  on  hate 
crimes (Honduras); 

95.50 
women and children, in particular in the context of digital space (Pakistan); 

Ensure  the  protection  of  the  rights  of  vulnerable  groups,  such  as 

95.51 
enforcement institutions and all branches of government (Australia); 

Take  further  steps  to  combat  corruption  in  the  judiciary,  law 

95.52 
corruption at all levels (Cyprus); 

Ensure  the  independence  of  the  judiciary  system  and  address 

Strengthen  efforts 

95.53 
in  public 
to  proactively 
administration,  inter  alia,  by  improving  the  efficiency  and  transparency  of 
public  service  delivery,  training  civil  servants,  establishing  more  transparent 
recruitment  procedures  and  strengthening  the  administration’s  capacity  to 
undertake merit-based recruitment (Austria); 

fight  corruption 

95.54  Make  effective  use,  as  soon  as  they  are  established,  of  the  new 
specialized anti-corruption institutions, such as the special anti-corruption and 
organized crime structures and the national bureau of investigation, to combat 
corruption  and  to  ensure  the  effective  conviction  of  high  profile  cases 
(Belgium); 

95.55 
Enhance  the  efforts  aimed  at  combating  corruption  and  fully 
implement  the  recommendations  on  transparency  of  the  Council  of  Europe’s 
Group of States against Corruption (Lithuania); 

95.56 
Strategy (Ukraine); 

Take measures to ensure implementation of the new Juvenile Justice 

95.57 
verbally or physically threatened or attacked journalists to justice (Sweden); 

Ensure that mechanisms are in place to bring perpetrators who have 

95.58 
Promote  media  freedom  by  investigating  and  taking  steps  to  ensure 
that  anti-defamation  and  slander  laws  are  not  used  to  launch  prosecutions  to 
intimidate journalists (Canada); 

95.59 
Take effective measures to strengthen the freedom of expression and 
independence  of  the  media,  to  ensure  a  safe  environment  for  investigative 
journalists and their protection from intimidation and attacks and to improve 
their working conditions (Germany); 

95.60 
universality and inclusion of all communities, groups and individuals (Serbia); 

Strengthen  respect  for  the  principles  of  religious  pluralism, 

13 

 
A/HRC/42/4 

14 

Guarantee  that  all  government  policies  respect  the  principles  of 
95.61 
religious pluralism, universality and inclusion of all communities and groups on 
an equal footing, especially with respect to the legal differentiation established 
in  Albania  between  five  legally  recognized  religious  communities  and  other 
religious  organizations,  in  light  of  the  recent  report  of  the  United  Nations 
Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief on his  mission to Albania 
(Poland); 

95.62 
Expedite  the  restitution  of  property  confiscated  from  Albanians, 
legalize  places  of  worship  and  ensure  that  the  process  is  carried  out  in  a  fair 
and transparent manner with the participation of all parties concerned (Syrian 
Arab Republic); 

95.63 
Accelerate the restitution of property and the legalization of places of 
worship  and  ensure  that  the  process  is  carried  out  in  an  equitable  and 
transparent manner (Senegal); 

95.64 
Implement  the  recommendations  of  the  Office  for  Democratic 
Institutions  and  Human  Rights  of  the  Organization  for  Security  and 
Cooperation  in  Europe  for  improving  the  conduct  of  elections  in  Albania 
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 

95.65 
Continue  addressing  the  issue  of  human  trafficking  as  a  matter  of 
urgency  and  ensure  adequate  protection  of  trafficking  victims  and  proactive 
investigation and successful prosecution of all cases of trafficking (Estonia); 

95.66 
Reinforce  measures  to  protect  victims  of  human  trafficking  and  all 
forms  of  abuse,  with  due  regard  to  the  situation  of  child  and  women  victims 
(Croatia); 

95.67 
during  border  surveillance  operations  and  give  special  attention 
unaccompanied children (Syrian Arab Republic); 

Intensify  efforts  to  prevent  and  detect  cases  of  human  trafficking 
to 

95.68 
Intensify,  in  line  with  Sustainable  Development  Goal  16,  efforts 
against  the  sale  of  and  trafficking  in  children  through  comprehensive 
investigations  and  prosecutions  of  perpetrators  with  effective  and  dissuasive 
sanctions (Honduras); 

95.69 
particularly women and children (Indonesia); 

Intensify  efforts  to  prevent  and  address  trafficking  in  persons, 

95.70 
women and girls (Iraq); 

Step  up  efforts  to  combat  trafficking  of  human  beings,  particularly 

95.71 
Step  up  efforts  to  prevent  and  detect  cases  of  trafficking  in  human 
beings  during  border  controls,  paying  particular  attention  to  unaccompanied 
children (Ukraine); 

95.72 
trafficking in children (Senegal); 

Ensure  effective,  dissuasive  prosecution  of  all  persons  involved  in 

Continue increasing national actions in the fight against trafficking in 
95.73 
persons,  especially  women  and  children,  reinforcing  measures  to  prevent, 
detect and punish such offences (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 

95.74 
identification of victims of trafficking and their protection (Israel); 

Provide training to law enforcement officials in order to improve the 

95.75 
identify potential or actual victims of trafficking (Jordan); 

Ensure  that  police  officers  are  properly  trained  so  that  they  can 

Strengthen  the  capacities  of  first  line  officers,  including  border  and 
95.76 
immigration  police  and  those  working  in  centres  for  irregular  migrants  and 
asylum centres, so as to improve the situation of victims of trafficking and their 
access to justice (Honduras); 

 
Ensure  that  the  State  Police  consistently  identify  and  protect 
95.77 
potential  victims  of  trafficking  in  persons  and  sexual  exploitation,  and  make 
sure  that  the  crimes  are  investigated  and  that  those  found  responsible  are 
convicted and held to account (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland); 

95.78 
Ensure  that  measures  are  taken  against  perpetrators  of  human 
trafficking and public employees involved in committing such crimes, as well as 
ensure that they are prosecuted and brought to justice (Syrian Arab Republic); 

Vigorously  investigate,  prosecute,  and  convict  traffickers,  including 
95.79 
complicit officials, under articles 110 (a) and 128 (b) of the Criminal Code and 
increase  the  number  of  judges  and  district  prosecutors  trained  on  victim-
centred approaches to trafficking in persons (United States of America); 

95.80 
Ensure  effective  investigation,  prosecution  and  sentencing  for  all 
incidents  of  trafficking  in  human  beings  and  ensure  due  accountability, 
including for State officials who are involved in crimes related to trafficking in 
human beings (Russian Federation); 

95.81 
Step  up  the  fight  against  trafficking  in  women  and  girls,  especially 
cases  relating  to  tourism  in  coastal  areas,  by  conducting  investigations, 
undertaking  prosecutions  and  obtaining  convictions  of  traffickers,  including 
State officials complicit in this crime (Serbia); 

95.82 
to combat trafficking in persons (Philippines); 

Intensify  efforts  to  foster  multisectoral  cooperation  on  programmes 

95.83 
fundamental unit of society (Egypt); 

Provide  support  and  protection  to  the  family  as  a  natural  and 

95.84 
rate (China); 

Further  protect  women’s  rights  and  raise  the  female  employment 

95.85 
Take  measures  to  combat  exploitation  of  women  in  the  informal 
labour market and ensure adequate labour and social protection in the private 
sector (India); 

Continue to promote economic and social development, further raise 
95.86 
people’s  living  standard  and  lay  a  solid  foundation  for  its  people  to  enjoy  all 
human rights (China); 

95.87 

Adopt a national strategy to tackle extreme poverty (Cyprus); 

95.88 
Continue  to  strengthen  social  policies  to  combat  poverty  and  social 
inequality by consolidating national programmes to promote employment and 
access  to  education,  food,  health  care  and  social  assistance  for  national 
minorities and other vulnerable groups of the population (Bolivarian Republic 
of Venezuela); 

95.89 
individuals in need of social care and social inclusion (Qatar); 

Reinvigorate  efforts  to  support  the  promotion  of  access  for 

Further consolidate the entrenchment of property rights, notably by 
95.90 
advancing  the  revision  of  property  deeds,  implementing  the  compensation 
scheme and advancing the digitalization and mapping of property (Austria); 

Take  further  measures  to  put  an  end  to  legal  uncertainty  and 
95.91 
informality  in  the  area  of  property  rights,  particularly  in  rural  areas,  by 
clarifying  the  criteria  for  obtaining  property  rights  and  remedying  cases  of 
unregistered properties (Canada); 

Protect  and  strengthen  individual  real  estate  property  rights  by 
95.92 
adopting balanced legislation that would provide for a fair settlement between 
the original owners, those who have received property titles within the process 
of legalization and State interests (Germany); 

A/HRC/42/4 

15 

 
A/HRC/42/4 

16 

Revise  the  2015  legislation  on  strategic  investments  so  that  “public 
95.93 
interest”  is  defined  in  a  more  restrictive  manner  that  does  not  legitimize 
expropriation for commercial purposes (Greece); 

95.94 
who are members of national minorities (Greece); 

Allow  for  the  registration  of  property  titles  of  rightful  landowners 

95.95 
Step  up  efforts  to  regularize  illegal  housing,  including  by  ensuring 
that any action taken in this area addresses the housing needs of the Roma and 
Egyptian communities (Ghana); 

95.96 
Continue  the  consolidation  of  legislation  on  the  restitution  of  and 
compensation  for  properties  confiscated  during  the  communist  period 
(Romania); 

Expand  the  sewage  network  and water  treatment  plants  throughout 
95.97 
the  country,  and  improve  the  performance  and  connections  of  wastewater 
systems (Spain); 

95.98 
without any discrimination (Uruguay); 

Adopt  policies  that  ensure  the  right  to  health  of  the  population 

95.99 
addressing health personnel deficiencies in rural areas (Indonesia); 

Ensure  access  to  health  care  for  all  of  its  population,  including  by 

Intensify measures to guarantee access to health care, education and 
95.100 
decent  housing  for  people  belonging  to  the  Roma  and  Egyptian  communities 
(Costa Rica); 

Improve access to health services and prevention in public health, in 
95.101 
particular  with  regard  to  access  to  care  for  persons  belonging  to  minorities, 
young  persons  and  women,  HIV  prevention  and  the  development  of  sexual 
education (France); 

to  prevent  mother-to-child 
95.102  Consider 
transmission  of  HIV/AIDS  through  regular  screening,  early  diagnosis  and  the 
distribution of antiretroviral drugs (Ghana); 

strengthening 

efforts 

95.103  Make  improvements  in  the  health  sector  to  address  the  concern 
raised by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women 
regarding mother-to-child transmission of HIV (Malaysia); 

95.104  Conduct  awareness  and  prevention  campaigns  on  HIV/AIDS, 
providing  access  to  appropriate  therapies  for  people  living  with  the  virus  or 
disease (Uruguay); 

95.105 
Implement  measures  that  effectively  protect  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual, 
transgender  and  intersex  persons  against  discrimination  in  access  to  medical 
care (Uruguay); 

95.106 
Increase  and  improve,  through  the  plan  for  assistance  to  victims  of 
mines  and  unexploded  ordnance,  the  policies  related  to  the  rehabilitation  and 
health  of  victims,  the  availability  of  services  for  them  in  remote  areas  and 
income generation (Argentina); 

95.107  Continue the efforts to maintain the near-universal enrolment rate in 
basic  education  and  to  foster  enrolment  in  pre-primary  education  and  non-
discrimination in education (Qatar); 

95.108  Allocate  sufficient  financial  resources  for  better  social  integration 
and  protection  of  children  in  vulnerable  situations  in  the  education  system 
(Algeria); 

95.109 
Strive  to  facilitate  access  to  compulsory  and  full-time  education  for 
all girls and boys, including members of minority groups, those with disabilities 
and  those  living  in  rural  and  remote  areas,  including,  inter  alia,  through  the 

 
improvement  of  school  infrastructure,  teacher  training  and  the  provision  of 
human, technical and financial resources (Serbia); 

95.110  Establish a national programme to support children living in poverty 
and  their  integration  in  the  country’s  education  system,  aiming,  inter  alia,  to 
reduce the number of out-of-school children (Portugal); 

95.111  Continue  efforts  to  promote  compulsory  education  and  to  reduce 
school  dropout,  especially  among  children  from  minorities  and  children  with 
disabilities (Slovenia); 

95.112 
Facilitate  access  to  compulsory  and  mainstream  education  for  all 
boys  and  girls,  including  those  belonging  to  minority  groups,  those  with 
disabilities and those from the remote rural areas (Montenegro); 

95.113  Continue  its  efforts  to  ensure  equal  access  to  education,  including 
physical  and  mental,  by  children  with  disabilities  and  children  of  minority 
groups (Myanmar); 

95.114  Guarantee  full  access  to  education  to  children  with  disabilities 
(Jordan); 

95.115  Continue with successful measures to facilitate access to compulsory 
education  for  girls  and  boys,  including  those  belonging  to  minority  groups 
(Estonia); 

95.116 
particularly focusing on children from minority groups (Germany); 

Promote  and  ensure  equal  access  to  education  for  all  children, 

Promote  and  facilitate  access  to  compulsory  and  mainstream 
95.117 
education  for  all  girls  and boys,  including  those  belonging  to  minority  groups 
and those living in rural and remote areas (Pakistan); 

95.118 
improving access to education in minority languages (Cyprus); 

Strengthen  the  protection  of  minorities’  rights  by  enhancing  and 

95.119  Apply  the  20  per  cent  threshold  for  the  use  of,  and  education  in, 
minority  languages  to  smaller  local  communities  instead  of  the  municipalities 
enlarged since 2014 (Greece); 

95.120  Develop  programmes  in  schools  to  eliminate  harassment  of  lesbian, 
gay,  bisexual,  transgender  and 
intersex  children  and  adolescents,  and 
implement psychological support measures to reduce the dropout rates of such 
students (Chile); 

95.121  Ensure  that 
intersex 
individuals  are  protected  from  bullying  and  discrimination  in  the  educational 
system (Israel); 

lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender  and 

95.122  Make  the  implementation  of  the  government  programme  on  the 
introduction  of  a  module  on  religion  in  schools  as  transparent  as  possible  in 
order  to  preserve  interreligious  understanding  and  social  harmony,  with  full 
respect for the rights of ethnic and linguistic minorities (Serbia); 

95.123  Continue  the  fight  against  inequalities  between  men  and  women,  in 
particular  by  allocating  the  necessary  resources  to  combat  violence  against 
women (Canada); 

95.124  Continue efforts to change the prevalent gender stereotypes, combat 
domestic violence  and further  promote the participation of women in political 
and public life (Czechia); 

95.125 
including through awareness-raising in Albanian society (Australia); 

Step  up  measures  to  reduce  domestic  and  gender-based  violence, 

95.126 
Improve  institutional  mechanisms  for  the  protection  of  victims  of 
domestic violence and fully implement, without further delay, the provisions of 
the national action plan on gender equality and domestic violence (Austria); 

A/HRC/42/4 

17 

 
95.127 
on domestic violence and violence against women (Slovenia); 

Strengthen efforts to implement legislation and national action plans 

95.128  Ensure  effective  implementation  of  the  recommendations  of  the 
Council  of  Europe  Group  of  Experts  on  Action  against  Violence  against 
Women and Domestic Violence (Belgium); 

95.129  Continue  its  efforts  to  bring  the  national  legal  framework  into 
compliance with the Istanbul Convention (Georgia); 

Put into effect a follow-up plan for the implementation of the Istanbul 
95.130 
Convention,  specifically  on  the  prevention  of  domestic  violence,  rehabilitation 
of  victims  and  engagement  with  perpetrators,  in  line  with  Sustainable 
Development Goal 5 (Netherlands); 

Strengthen  measures  to  address  the  issue  of  domestic  violence  and 
95.131 
ensure  the  full  enforcement  of  the  law  on  measures  against  violence  in  family 
relations (Indonesia); 

95.132  Ensure  the  full  implementation  of  the  law  on  measures  against 
violence in family relations through the development of by-laws, the allocation 
of  sufficient  funding  and  the  training  of  staff  to  ensure  adequate  support  to 
victims of violence (Sweden); 

95.133  Ensure  the  full  implementation  of  the  law  on  measures  against 
violence in family relations, prohibiting the use of mediation or conciliation in 
cases concerning domestic violence (Iceland); 

95.134  Take  further  measures  to  combat  domestic  violence,  including  by 
fully  implementing  the  existing  legislation  and  by  guaranteeing  that  women 
victims of violence can access legal aid and social services (Italy); 

95.135  Continue  endeavours  aimed  at  combating  domestic  violence  and 
ensure  that  all  reports  of  domestic  violence  are  thoroughly  investigated  and 
perpetrators are brought to justice (Lithuania); 

95.136 
Fight  against  domestic  violence  through  preventive  and  punitive 
measures, identification and elimination of the obstacles to filing complaints for 
victims of violence and by raising the awareness of the population (France); 

95.137 
Implement  fully  the  normative  framework  and  policies  aimed  at 
preventing  violence  against  women,  particularly  by  addressing  factors  that 
prevent denunciations of cases of gender-based violence (Honduras); 

95.138  Guarantee  better  protection  for  women  and  children  by  putting  in 
place mechanisms that provide early warning of signs of violence (Algeria); 

95.139  Contribute  financially  to  the  free  consultation  helpline  for  girls  and 
women victims of gender-based violence (Switzerland); 

95.140  Ensure that police are adequately trained and have skills to respond, 
investigate and properly manage cases of violence against women, as well as to 
seek orders of protection for victims (Iceland); 

95.141 
victims of gender-based violence (Philippines); 

Step up efforts to provide its duty bearers with  training on assisting 

95.142 
Provide  ongoing  training  for  police,  judges,  health  professionals, 
victim support services and other professional institutions dealing with victims 
of gender-based and domestic violence (Republic of Moldova); 

95.143  Adopt  the  necessary 
legislative  and  administrative  measures, 
including through the sensitization and training of law enforcement officials, in 
order  to  prevent  impunity  for  acts  of  domestic  violence  and  provide  proper 
assistance and support to victims (Brazil); 

A/HRC/42/4 

18 

 
Provide  continuing  training  to  police,  judges,  health  professionals, 
95.144 
victim support services and other professional institutions working with victims 
of violence against women and domestic violence (Iceland); 

95.145 
Provide  adequate  training  for  law  enforcement  agencies  to  respond, 
investigate  and  efficiently  manage  cases  of  gender-based  violence,  including 
domestic violence (Maldives); 

95.146  Train  law  enforcement  officers  to  recognize  the  signs  of  domestic 
violence  and  to  enforce  the  laws  on  rape  and  amendments  to  the  law  on 
domestic violence  effectively, including in cases of spousal rape (United States 
of America); 

95.147  Better protect victims of domestic violence, in particular women and 
children (Germany); 

95.148  Continue  providing  adequate  resources 
rehabilitation services for victims of domestic violence (Malaysia); 

for  prevention  and 

95.149  Take  further  steps  to  enhance  policies  to  protect  and  provide 
psychosocial  support  to  vulnerable  groups,  particularly  those  facing  domestic 
violence and sexual violence and for victims of human trafficking (Myanmar); 

95.150  Continue  strengthening  its  referral  mechanism  to  adequately  and 
promptly  assist  victims  of  gender-based  violence,  in  particular  women  and 
children (Philippines); 

95.151  Ensure the effective implementation by the State  of the law on legal 
aid  guarantees,  especially  with  regard  to  victims  of  domestic  violence  and 
sexual  violence,  and  ensure  that  victims  are  informed  of  their  right  to  access 
legal aid (Republic of Moldova); 

95.152 
Implement  preventive  measures  against  the  phenomenon  of  forced 
marriage  and  effectively  apply  the  sanctions  established  by  law  for  cases  of 
gender-based violence (Spain); 

95.153 
Increase  the  coordination  between  the  institutions  that  provide 
prevention  and  rehabilitation  services  to  victims  of  domestic  violence  and 
ensure the resources for the operation of those institutions (Chile); 

95.154 
Increase the number of reception and orientation centres available to 
assist  women  victims  of  domestic  violence,  sexual  violence  and  trafficking  in 
human beings (Costa Rica); 

95.155 
Strengthen  the  support  for  victims  of  domestic  violence,  especially 
women  and  children,  by  increasing  the  number  of  shelter  spaces,  in  line  with 
article 23 of the Istanbul Convention (Denmark); 

95.156  Ensures  that  services  to  victims  of  violence  against  women  and 
domestic  violence  are  made  available  to  the  most  marginalized  communities, 
including  women  in  rural  areas,  women  with  disabilities  and  women  from 
ethnic minority groups (Singapore); 

95.157  Continue  to  promote  and  protect  the  rights  of  the  child  (Brunei 
Darussalam); 

95.158  Advance  in  the  effective  implementation  of  the  National  Agenda  for 
Children’s Rights 2017–2020, especially with respect to eliminating all forms of 
violence against children (Uruguay); 

95.159  Allocate  more  resources  to  increase  its  share  of  funding  for  the 
National Agenda for Children’s Rights to ensure more sustainable programmes 
to support the development and protection of its children (Singapore); 

95.160 
Increase  funds  so  that  newly  established  mechanisms,  such  as  the 
child rights protection and promotion section, can function effectively (Malta); 

A/HRC/42/4 

19 

 
A/HRC/42/4 

20 

95.161  Continue its efforts to accelerate the implementation of its legal and 
policy framework on child protection (Georgia); 

95.162  Ensure  the  effective  implementation  of  legal  provisions  on  child 
protection (France); 

95.163  Continue  efforts  towards  the  implementation  of  its  legal  and  policy 
framework on child protection (Slovakia); 

95.164  Ensure that all mechanisms and State institutions mandated by Law 
No. 18/2017 to promote, protect and fulfil the rights of children, including the 
Office  of  the  People’s  Advocate,  are  appropriately  funded  and  adequately 
resourced (Ireland); 

95.165  Continue  conducting training and awareness-raising activities in the 
field of children’s rights (Philippines); 

95.166  Continue  to  implement  policies  to  systematically  and  effectively 
combat violence against children (Chile); 

95.167  Continue  its  awareness-raising  programmes  and  campaigns  against 
violence  in  all  environments  and  the  promotion  of  good  practices  of  family 
conflict resolution and positive parenting (Slovakia); 

95.168 
(Cyprus); 

Prohibit  corporal  punishment  at  schools  and  in  public  institutions 

95.169  Take  effective  measures  to  fight  child  poverty,  child  slavery,  forced 
labour and sexual exploitation of children (Belgium); 

95.170  Continue  efforts  to  combat  child  exploitation  through  a  national 
action plan for the protection of children from economic exploitation, including 
children in street situations (Brunei Darussalam); 

95.171  Update and strengthen the normative and institutional framework to 
protect all children from online risks (Maldives); 

95.172  Discontinue  the  practice  of  temporary  placement  of  children  in 
institutions and develop and implement a comprehensive deinstitutionalization 
strategy (Bulgaria); 

95.173 
Implement  its  plan  for  the  deinstitutionalization  of  children,  and 
reunite  them  with  their  biological  families  or  place  them  in  a  family-type 
setting, while ensuring that no child is left without protection (Switzerland); 

95.174 

Set a minimum legal age of marriage of 18 years (Cyprus); 

95.175 
accountable those violating such a ban (Russian Federation); 

Introduce  a  legislative  ban  on  early  child  marriages  and  hold 

95.176 
marriage (Italy); 

Strengthen the efforts to prevent and combat child, early and forced 

95.177 
prohibition  and 
(Slovakia); 

Strictly  prohibit  child  marriage,  criminalize  violations  of  that 
increase  efforts  to  raise  awareness  of  child  marriage 

95.178  Develop  tailored  policy  responses  at  the  national  level,  especially  in 
rural areas, aimed at protecting children from the  phenomenon of blood feud 
(Croatia); 

95.179  Continue  to  devote  primary  attention  to  guaranteeing  the  full 
enjoyment  of  the  rights  of  children,  including  the  right  to  access  education, 
including for those involved in episodes of blood feud (Italy); 

95.180  Continue  government  efforts 
to  guarantee  equal  and  non-
discriminatory treatment of individuals belonging to national  minority groups 
(Egypt); 

 
95.181  Continue  efforts  to  strengthen  the  protection  of  minorities  and 
combat discrimination, in particular through additional legislation to make the 
existing  law  on  the  protection  of  minorities  effective  and  to  bring  it  into 
conformity with international human rights standards (Germany); 

95.182  Take  further  measures  to  fully  implement  the  law  on  the  protection 
of national minorities in Albania, to ensure that the rights of persons belonging 
to national minorities are protected, including their rights to self-identification, 
to learn their mother tongue and to use their minority language (Bulgaria); 

Strengthen  its  efforts  so  that  the  law  on  the  protection  of  national 
95.183 
minorities  can  be  effectively  applied  by  adopting  additional  legal  provisions 
(Switzerland); 

95.184  Revise  the  law  on  national  minorities  and  enact  implementing 
legislation  so  that  the  right  to  self-identification  is  not  curtailed  by  the  use  of 
civil registry data with regard to ethnicity (Greece); 

95.185 
Further  improve  the  existing  legal  framework  and  policies  for 
guaranteeing  non-discriminatory  treatment  for  national  minorities,  by 
enhancing a broad consultation process with representatives of minorities and 
taking  into  account  the  recommendations  contained  in  the  2014  resolution  of 
the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe (Romania); 

95.186  Ensure that the law on the 2020 census does not reintroduce a fine for 
self-identification statements that do not correspond with civil registry data and 
address  relevant  concerns  of  Albania’s  minorities  through  information 
campaigns (Greece); 

95.187  Address institutional discrimination against Roma and take measures 
to  achieve  equal  access  for  Roma  women,  girls  and  infants  to  medical  care 
(Syrian Arab Republic); 

95.188  Consider  implementing  targeted  measures  to  facilitate  access  to 
personal  identity  documents  and  employment  for  persons  belonging  to 
minorities, particularly the Roma and Balkan-Egyptian communities (Brazil); 

95.189 
Further promote and protect the rights of persons with disabilities in 
accordance with its obligations under the Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities (Lithuania); 

95.190  Continue efforts to improve the situation of persons with disabilities 
and ensure their full integration into society (Egypt); 

95.191  Take further steps to provide accessibility, welfare services and social 
assistance to all persons with disabilities, especially children (Bulgaria); 

95.192 
persons with disabilities to quality health, education and employment (Israel); 

Promote  full  implementation  of  the  legislation  regarding  access  of 

95.193  Ensure  effective  implementation  of  national  legislation  to  address 
structural  problems  in  providing  social  care  services  and  access  to  quality 
education and employment to persons with disabilities (India); 

95.194  Guarantee the full implementation of the Action Plan on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities, thus ensuring the right  to inclusive education for all 
children with disabilities (Italy); 

95.195  Respect  the  rights  of  persons  with  mental  health  conditions  and 
psychosocial  disabilities,  in  line  with  the  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  Persons 
with  Disabilities,  including  by  combating  institutionalization,  stigma,  violence 
and  overmedicalization,  and  by  developing  community-based  and  people-
centred  mental  health  services  that  promote  their  inclusion  in  the  community 
and respect their free and informed consent (Portugal); 

95.196  Adopt  additional  measures  to  protect  migrants  and  asylum  seekers 
(Iraq); 

A/HRC/42/4 

21 

 
A/HRC/42/4 

Strengthen the  measures to avoid statelessness, especially for groups 
95.197 
in  vulnerable  situations,  facilitating  the  process  of  naturalization  for  refugees 
and Roma (Argentina). 

96.  All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect 
the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not 
be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. 

22 

 
Annex 

  Composition of the delegation 

A/HRC/42/4 

The delegation of Albania was headed by Mme. Artemis Dralo, Deputy Minister for 

Europe and Foreign Affairs, and composed of the following members: 

•  Mme. Ravesa Lleshi, Ambassadeur de l’Albanie auprès UNOG, Membre; 

•  Mme.  Brunilda  Peci  (Minarolli),  Ministère  de  l’Europe  et  des  Affaires  Etrangères, 

Direction des Organisations Internationales, Membre; 

•  M.  Ilir  Nezaj,  Conseiller  en  charge  des  Droits  de  l’Homme  près  de  la  Mission  de 

l’Albanie auprès UNOG, Membre; 

•  Mme Merita Xhafaj, DG, Direction générale des politiques et du développement de 
la santé et de la protection sociale, Ministère de la Santé et de la Protection sociale, 
Membre; 

•  Mme Mimoza Arbi, Directrice du service juridique, Parlement albanais, Membre; 

•  Mme Iva Seseri, Conseillère, juriste au Parlement albanais, Membre; 

•  M.  Bekim  Murati,  DG,  Agence  de  Soutien  à  la  Gouvernance  Locale,  Ministère  de 

l’Intérieur, Membre; 

•  M. Kujtim Luli, Bureau du Procureur général, Membre; 

•  Mme  Alida  Mici,  Directrice,  Direction  de  l’intégration,  de  la  coordination,  des 
accords et de l’assistance, Direction générale  de la conformité réglementaire, de la 
santé  et  de  la  protection  sociale,  Ministère  de  la  Santé  et  des  Affaires  Sociales, 
Membre; 

•  Mme  Alma  Tandili,  Présidente  de  l’Agence  Nationale  pour  les  Droits  et  la 

Protection de l’Enfant, Membre; 

•  Mme  Brunilda  Dervishaj,  Spécialiste,  Secteur  des  politiques  et  stratégies  pour 
l’inclusion  sociale  et  l’égalité  des  genres,  Direction  des  politiques  et  stratégies  de 
développement  pour  la  santé  et  la  protection  sociale,  Ministère  de  la  Santé  et  des 
Affaires Sociales, Membre; 

•  Mme Silvana Alimadhi, Responsable de la protection des mineurs et de la violence 

domestique, Direction générale de la police d’État, Membre; 

•  M. Lavdim Durbaku, Direction générale de la police d’État, Membre; 

•  Mme  Dikensa  Topi,  Chef  de  secteur,  Ministère  de  l’Education  et  des  Sports 

Membre; 

•  Mme Flutura Agaj, Ministère de la Culture, Membre; 

•  Mme Jetmira Sula, Direction générale des prisons, Ministère de la Justice, Membre; 

•  M. Gramoz Sokolaj, DG, Agence de Soutien à la Gouvernance Locale, Ministère de 

l’Intérieur, Membre; 

•  Mme.  Klodiana  Kamberi,  Commissaire  à  la  protection  contre  la  discrimination, 

Membre; 

•  Mme.  Gloria  Çarkaxhiu,  Spécialiste,  Direction  générale  de  la  codification  et  de 
l’harmonisation des législations, Ministère de la Justice, membre de la délégation. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
