United Nations 

General Assembly 

A/HRC/17/11/Add.1

Distr.: General 
31 May 2011 

Original: English 

Human Rights Council 
Seventeenth session 
Agenda item 6 
Universal Periodic Review 

  Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic 

Review* 

  Georgia 

  Addendum 

  Views on conclusions and/or recommendations, voluntary commitments 

and replies presented by the State under review 

*  The present document was not edited before being sent to the United Nations translation 

services. 

GE.11-13681 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A/HRC/17/11/Add.1 

Georgia  welcomes  the  recommendations  made  in  the  course  of  its  Universal 
Periodic  Review  on  28  January  2010.  During  the  review,  Georgia  received  163 
recommendations,  of  which,  96  were  accepted  instantly,  five  were  immediately  rejected 
and 62 were set aside for later examination. The following Addendum provides Georgia’s 
responses  to  the  third  category of  recommendations. Within  this  category,  the Addendum 
provides information on those recommendations that (1) Georgia accepts; it must be noted 
that the acceptance of a particular recommendation may also imply that the efforts of the 
Government of Georgia were underway prior to receiving the recommendation and either 
have  been  completed  or  are  currently  ongoing;  (2)  Georgia  accepts  partially,  and  (3) 
Georgia does not accept. 

  Georgia accepts the following recommendations: 

106.14, 106.51 

On  8  April  2011,  the  Parliament  of  Georgia  passed  amendments  to  the  Law  of 
Georgia on Broadcasting to enhance media ownership and financial transparency. Measures 
included  a  prohibition  for  companies  registered  in  offshore  locations  to  own  shares  in  a 
broadcasting license.   

106.21, 106.46 

Georgia  is  working  actively  to  meet  all  Millennium  Development  Goals  including 
those  on  universal  primary  education  and  reduction  of  infant  and  under-5  mortality  rates. 
Georgia will remain firmly committed to these efforts.   

106.22, 106.23 

Georgia directs broad efforts to protect and promote rights of the child in line with 
Guidelines  for  the  Alternative  Care  of  Children,  irrespective  of  their  religious  or  ethnic 
origin, at the policy level and in practice. Georgia will continue to work diligently towards 
these ends as called for in these recommendations. 

106.25 

Georgia  is  committed  to  constructive  cooperation  with  the  Human  Rights  Council 
and  will  submit,  on  a  voluntary  basis,  a  midterm  report  on  follow-up  to  accepted  UPR 
recommendations, 
resolution 
A/HRC/16/L.39. 

the  Human  Rights  Council 

in  accordance  with 

106.27, 106.30, 106.33 

Georgia fully shares the recommendations that aim at strengthening the protection of 
women against discrimination and the promotion of gender equality, and directs significant 
efforts towards gender mainstreaming. 

106.37 

Georgia is firmly committed to enhancing the protection and reintegration of street 
children  and  has  taken  significant  steps  towards  these  ends,  including  the  creation  of 
designated  day-care  centers,  pursuant  to  2008-2011  Governmental  Action  Plan  on  Child 
Welfare.   

106.48 

While  Georgia  recognizes  the  importance  of  addressing  the  problem  regarding  the 
confiscation of places of worship, it notes that confiscations took place during Soviet rule, 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A/HRC/17/11/Add.1 

remain  highly  contested  among  the  various  religious  confessions  and  that  restitution  can 
only result from careful study and investigation. This process is currently underway and has 
already yielded positive results.   

106.52 

In its recently delivered judgment,1 the Constitutional Court of Georgia reviewed the 
Law of Georgia on Assemblies and Manifestation, repealed norms restricting enjoyment of 
these freedoms and found them incompatible with the Constitution of Georgia guaranteeing 
individuals the freedom to assemble and peacefully manifest. 

106.59 

Georgia supports the recommendation as it is consistent with Georgia’s practice and 

policy of promoting the rights of minorities, including those of the Armenian minority.  

106.60, 106.61 

Georgia  supports  these  recommendations  as  the  continued  strengthening  of  IDP 
rights  and  the  improvement  of  their  socio-economic  situation  are  the  cornerstones  of  the 
Action  Plan  for  the  implementation  of  2009-2011  State  Strategy  on  Internally  Displaced 
Persons.  

  Georgia partially accepts the following recommendations: 

106.5, 106.6, 106.7, 106.8 

Georgia  has  signed  the  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  Persons  with  Disabilities 
(CRPD)  and  its  Optional  Protocol  in  2009  and  is  at  the  moment  conducting  the  required 
analysis  of  its  domestic  legislation  and  policies  in  considering  the  possible  ratification  of 
the  instruments.  However,  the  ratification  is  subject  to  the  decision  of  the  Parliament. 
Therefore, no definite statement can be made at this moment. 

106.11, 106.12 

Government is undertaking the review of national legal framework for the reason of 
subsequent  ratification  of  1954  Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of  Stateless  Persons. 
However,  Georgia  is  not  intending  to  become  a  part  of  the  1961  Convention  on  the 
Reduction of Statelessness. 

106.16 

Georgia supports the premise of this recommendation and works closely with both 
the Venice Commission and OSCE/ODIHR to ensure that their recommendations are taken 
into account in the final package of electoral amendments to the maximum extent possible. 
The reform process is a multi-party and multi-sectoral effort, with 15 political parties and 
civil  society  experts  being  directly  engaged  in  the  work  of  the  Election  Code  Working 
Group.  Final  consensus  will  require  an  intensive  consultation  process,  in  which 
OSCE/ODIHR recommendations will serve as important guide posts. However, the extent 

1  Political Union of Citizens “Movement for United Georgia”, Political Union of Citizens “Georgian 
Conservative Party”, Georgian Young Lawyers’ Association, the Public Defender of Georgia and 
citizens of Georgia - Zviad Dzidziguri, Kakha Kukava, Dachi Tsaguria and Jaba Jishkariani v. 
Parliament of Georgia (Judgment of the Constitutional Court of Georgia N2/482, 483, 487, 502). 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A/HRC/17/11/Add.1 

of the implementation of Venice Commission and OSCE/ODIHR recommendations will be 
subject to broad political consensus. 

106.19 

Georgia  accepts  the  essence  of  the  recommendation.  However,  Georgia  cannot 
accept the portion of the recommendation asking specifically to “amend legislation”, as it 
considers  that  existing  national  law,  policy  and  programs  comply  with  its  international 
obligations  under  the  named  conventions.  Georgia  cooperates  closely  with  the  United 
Nations  Treaty  Monitoring  Bodies,  will  continue  to  do  so  in  the  future  and  will  take 
measures  as  necessary 
international 
commitments.  

to  ensure  continued  compatibility  with 

its 

106.20 

The first part of the recommendation enjoys Georgia’s support insofar as it calls for 
the  promotion  “of  a  general  environment  that  ensures  the  protection  of  the  fundamental 
freedoms of all citizens”. Georgia cannot support the second part of the recommendation to 
the extent that it asks specifically for the adoption of a national strategy on press freedom. 
Georgia  believes  that  the  existing  legislative  and  policy  framework,  including  its  Law  on 
Broadcasting,  Law  on  Freedom  of  Speech  and  Expression  and  the  Code  of  Conduct  for 
Broadcasters,  guarantees  freedom  of  the  press.  Georgia  intends  to  continue  to  ensure  this 
protection through measures that it considers necessary. 

106.28 

Georgia  is  devoted  to  combating  discrimination  based  on  gender  or  marital  status, 
however, no further amendment of legislation is envisaged, since current legislative acts are 
in full compliance with international standards in the field of discrimination against women. 

106.29 

Georgia  works  diligently  to  ensure  inadmissibility  of  gender  based  discrimination 
and  has  a  comprehensive  legal  framework  for  this  end.  Nevertheless,  Georgia  cannot 
support  the  part  of  this  recommendation  asking  specifically  for  the  development  of 
“gender-sensitive poverty eradication programmers and strategies”, since poverty-reduction 
efforts are needs-based and non-discriminatory on any ground, including gender. 

106.31 

Georgia agrees that no one should face discrimination based on gender, ethnic origin 
or a disability and has taken significant steps to prevent such discrimination. Georgia will 
continue  to  ensure  that  its  legislation  and  policies  are  in  line  with  adopted  international 
standards in these areas. Georgia, however, cannot accept the part of the recommendation 
asking to “promulgate” legislation to this end, because such decisions will be made based 
on  continued  legislative  analysis  and  in  the  event  of  a  gap  between  adopted  international 
standards and national laws.  

106.32, 106.34 

Georgia  accepts  the  spirit  of  these  recommendations  insofar  as  they  call  for 
increased  participation  of  women  in  public  life  and  has  directed  significant  efforts  to 
promote the rights of women as described in its responses to recommendations 106.27 and 
106.30. Georgia cannot, however, support the recommendations to the extent that they may 
entail  the  introduction  of  legislative  quotas  because  political  parties  across  the  spectrum 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A/HRC/17/11/Add.1 

expressed opposition to this system throughout the recent drafting of the Gender Equality 
Law. 

106.39 

Georgia  accepts  the  premise  of  the  recommendation  and  will  give  a  due 
consideration to the recommendations of the Venice Commission. However, the extent of 
the  implementation  of  Venice  Commission  recommendations  will  be  subject  to  broad 
consensus among the relevant stakeholders. 

106.40 

Georgia agrees with the call of the present recommendation for continued reforms to 
improve  the  judiciary.  However,  Georgia  cannot  accept  the  part  of  the  recommendation 
urging  to  “restore”  the  confidence  of  the  population  in  the  judicial  system.  Georgia  had 
inherited a Soviet judiciary characterized by general lack of public trust. International and 
national indices clearly show that public trust in the judicial system is growing steadily as a 
result  of  undertaken  reforms.  Georgia  is  committed  to  continuing  its  efforts  towards 
guaranteeing  full  independence  of  judiciary  that  in  itself  contributes  to  the  increase  of 
public trust. 

106.41 

Georgia  agrees  with  the  objectives  of  the  recommendation,  but  cannot  agree  with 
any  implication  embedded  in  it  that  undermines  the  significant  progress  that  Georgia  has 
made  in  the  fight  against  torture,  cruel  and  inhuman  treatment  by  police  and  prison 
officials. In 2007, the CoE/CPT emphasized considerable progress and noted an 80 percent 
decrease in the number of ill-treatment cases in police detention facilities. 

106.42 

Georgia  agrees  with  the  premise  of  the  recommendation  that  aims  at  full 
accountability of law enforcement agencies. Georgia cannot, however, agree with the part 
that  calls  for  altering  the  existing  complaints  procedures,  since  Georgia  has  already 
established a comprehensive complaints system in line with international standards. 

106.43 

As noted in its response to recommendation 106.42 Georgia accepts the call for full 
accountability  of  law  enforcement  officials.  At  the  same  time,  Georgia  believes  that  the 
inquiry  policies  currently  in  place  provide  for  effective  and  transparent  investigation  of 
allegations of excessive use of force by law enforcement officials and cannot  accede to this 
recommendation’s call for the revision of inquiry polices at place. 

106.45, 106.50, 106.53 

Georgia  agrees  with  the  essence  of  the  recommendations  and  is  determined  to 
further media transparency and duly investigate any threat against journalists. However, it 
cannot  agree  with  the  parts  of  the  recommendations  calling  for  the  government  to  take  a 
lead in addressing public trust, reduce self-censorship and unbalanced reporting since these 
measures fall within the competence of media outlets and are self-regulatory. On its part, 
the  Government  of  Georgia  has  taken  steps,  including  through  cooperation  with 
international broadcasting agencies, to strengthen the professional standards and reporting 
quality within the nationally-broadcast Georgian Public Broadcaster (GPB). Private media 
outlets  have  also  made  strides  in  the  quality  of  reporting,  which  Georgia  believes  in  sum 
will incrementally contribute to higher levels of public trust in the media. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A/HRC/17/11/Add.1 

106.56, 106.57, 106.58 

Georgia  accepts  the  premise  of  the  recommendation  and  in  cooperation  with 
international organizations and civil society has achieved significant progress towards these 
ends. Georgia takes all appropriate measures to guarantee the forcefully displaced persons 
(FDPs)  deported  from  Georgia  by  the  Soviet  regime  in  1940s  the  full  enjoyment  of  their 
rights in the process of repatriation. However, Georgia finds it unacceptable to label all of 
them with a certain ethnic origin and thus, cannot accept the term “Meskhetian Turks” as a 
priori hindering their inherent right to self-identification. 

106.62 

Georgia  accepts  the  part  of  the  recommendation  regarding  the  need  to  provide 
adequate  housing  to  IDPs,  however,  it  must  also  note  that  evictions  in  certain  cases  may 
take place without the consent of the individual. Georgia directs significant efforts to ensure 
consent in all possible cases of evictions and is guided by Standard Operational Procedures 
for  Eviction  of  IDPs  and  Provision  of  Durable  Housing,  developed  in  collaboration  with 
international actors. Georgia will continue to work diligently to uphold these standards.  

  Georgia does not accept the following recommendations: 

106.1-106.10 

Georgia  rejects  these  recommendations  apart  from  the  recommendations  regarding 
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of 
children in armed conflict which is already implemented. The Optional Protocol is in force 
for Georgia since 3 September 2010. 

•  Georgia  shares  the  aspirational  goals  of  the  Optional  Protocol  to  the  International 
Covenant  on  Economic,  Social  and  Cultural  Rights,  however,  is  not  intending  to 
sign and ratify the instrument at this time. 

•  Georgia  is  not  intending  to  sign  and  ratify  the  International  Convention  for  the 
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CED). This decision can be 
reviewed at the later date.  

•  At  present,  Georgia  is  not  considering  becoming  a  party  to  the  International 
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of 
Their  Families  (ICRMW).  Convention  enshrines  rights  and  principles  that  already 
exist in international human rights instruments to which Georgia is a party. 

106.13 

Georgia  complies  and  will  continue  to  comply  with  all  United  Nations  Security 
Council  resolutions,  including  Resolution  1866  (2009).  However,  Georgia  cannot  accept 
the one-sided nature of the present recommendation, as Resolution 1866 equally binds not 
only  Georgia,  but  also  the  other  party  to  the  conflict  -  a  state  occupying  two  Georgian 
regions  and  directly  limiting  Georgia’s  ability  to  fully  implement  the  said  resolution.  By 
the  present 
the  occupying  state, 
aligning  with 
recommendation also directly hinders Georgia’s efforts to implement Resolution 1866.  

the  policy  of 

the  state 

issuing 

106.15 

Georgia recognizes the importance of collaboration with the Venice Commission in 
constitutional reform and maintained a close relationship with the Commission throughout 
its  recent  constitutional  reform  process.  However,  Georgia  cannot  accept  the  part  of  the 
recommendation  suggesting  to  reconsider  all  the  recommendations  of  the  Venice 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A/HRC/17/11/Add.1 

Commission  on  the  constitutional  reform,  particularly  in  light  of  the  adoption  of 
constitutional amendments in October 2011 following a ten-month nationwide consultation 
process with civil society, political parties and the public. 

106.17, 106.18 

Georgia  cannot  accept  the  recommendations  because  since  2003  Rose  Revolution 
police reform has topped the Georgian Government’s agenda and its existing legislation on 
police is already in line with international standards. While Georgia intends to continue to 
align  its  legislative  framework  with  evolving  international  standards  in  the  future,  it  does 
not intend to amend its Law on Police at this time.  

106.24, 106.26, 106.38, 106.44, 106.54, 106.55 

Georgia  will  not  consider  these  recommendations  as  they  are  made  by  a  state  that 
directly hinders Georgia’s ability to protect even the basic human rights of the population 
residing  in  its  regions  of  Abkhazia,  Georgia  and  the  Tskhinvali  region/South  Ossetia, 
Georgia. 

106.36 

Georgia  shares  the  aim  of  the  recommendation  to  prohibit  all  forms  of  corporal 
punishment  of  children.  Georgia  however,  believes  that  the  existing  Georgian  legislation 
provides for a blanket prohibition on all forms of corporal punishment, including directed 
against  children. Its  existing national  legal  framework  is  in  compliance with  international 
standards  and  adequately  protects  children  from  any  form  of  corporal  punishment.  Thus, 
Georgia does not intend to amend the applicable legislation. 

106.47 

Georgia  cannot  accept  this  recommendation  and  no  further  steps  will  be  taken 
inasmuch  as  the  existing  Georgian  legislation  already  provides  all  organizations,  be  it  of 
religious or other character, with the ability to register legally as a for profit or a non-profit 
entity.  Should  a  religious  organization  choose  to  register  as  a  non-profit  entity  (as  is  the 
practice in numerous democracies) it can take advantage of various tax benefits.  

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
